

========================================
Abortion
========================================
Overview Around 73 million induced abortions take place worldwide each year. Six out of 10 of all unintended pregnancies, and 3 out of 10 of all pregnancies, end in induced abortion (1).Comprehensive abortion care is included in the list of essential health care services published by WHO in 2020. Abortion is a simple health care intervention that can be safely and effectively managed by a wide range of health workers using medication or a surgical procedure. In the first 12 weeks of pregnancy, a medical abortion can also be safely self-managed by the pregnant person outside of a health care facility , in whole or in part. This requires that the woman has access to accurate information, quality medicines and support from a trained health worker .Comprehensive abortion care includes the provision of information, abortion management and post-abortion care. It encompasses care related to miscarriage , induced abortion , incomplete abortion as well as intrauterine fetal demise. The information in this fact sheet focuses on care related to induced abortion. Scope of the problemWhen carried out using a method recommended by WHO appropriate to the pregnancy duration, and by someone with the necessary skills, abortion is a safe health care intervention (5). However, when people with unintended pregnancies face barriers to attaining safe, timely, affordable, geographically reachable, respectful and non-discriminatory abortion care, they often resort to unsafe abortion.1Global estimates from 2010–2014 demonstrate that 45% of all induced abortions are unsafe. Of all unsafe abortions, one third were performed under the least safe conditions, i.e. by untrained persons using dangerous and invasive methods. More than half of all these unsafe abortions occurred in Asia, most of them in south and central Asia. In Latin American and Africa, the majority of all abortions were unsafe. In Africa, nearly half of all abortions occurred under the least safe circumstances (3).Consequences of inaccessible quality abortion care Lack of access to safe, affordable, timely and respectful abortion care, and the stigma associated with abortion, pose risks to women’s physical and mental well-being throughout the life-course. Inaccessibility of quality abortion care risks violating a range of human rights of women and girls, including the right to life; the right to the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health; the right to benefit from scientific progress and its realization; the right to decide freely and responsibly on the number, spacing and timing of children; and the right to be free from torture, cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment and punishment. One review from 2003–12, found that 4.7-13% of maternal deaths were linked to abortive pregnancy outcomes (4) but noted that maternal deaths due to abortion, and more specifically unsafe abortion, are often misclassified and underreported given the stigma. Deaths from safe abortion are negligible, <1/100 000 (5). On the other hand, in regions where unsafe abortions are common, the death rates are high, at > 200/100 000 abortions. Estimates from 2012 indicate that in developing countries alone, 7 million women per year were treated in hospital facilities for complications of unsafe abortion (6). Physical health risks associated with unsafe abortion include:incomplete abortion ;haemorrhage ;infection;uterine perforation ; anddamage to the genital tract and internal organs as a consequence of inserting dangerous objects into the vagina or anus.Restrictive abortion regulation can cause distress and stigma, and risk constituting a violation of human rights of women and girls, including the right to privacy and the right to non-discrimination and equality, while also imposing financial burdens on women and girls. Regulations that force women to travel to attain legal care, or require mandatory counselling or waiting periods, lead to loss of income and other financial costs, and can make abortion inaccessible to women with low resources .Estimates from 2006 show that complications of unsafe abortions cost health systems in developing countries US$ 553 million per year for post-abortion treatments. In addition, households experienced US$ 922 million in loss of income due to long-term disability related to unsafe abortion (10). Countries and health systems could make substantial monetary savings by providing greater access to modern contraception and quality induced abortion . A set of scoping reviews from 2021 indicate that abortion regulations – by being linked to fertility – affect women’s education, participation on the labour market and positive contribution to GDP growth. The legal status of abortion can also affect children’s educational outcomes, and their earnings on the labour market later in life. For example, legalization of abortion – by reducing the number of unwanted pregnancies and thus increasing the likelihood that children are born wanted – can be linked to greater parental investments in children, including in girls’ schooling (9). Expanding quality abortion careEvidence shows that restricting access to abortions does not reduce the number of abortions (1); however, it does affect whether the abortions that women and girls attain are safe and dignified. The proportion of unsafe abortions are significantly higher in countries with highly restrictive abortion laws than in countries with less restrictive laws (2).Barriers to accessing safe and respectful abortion include high costs, stigma for those seeking abortions and health care workers, and the refusal of health workers to provide an abortion based on personal conscience or religious belief. Access is further impeded by restrictive laws and requirements that are not medically justified, including criminalization of abortion, mandatory waiting periods, provision of biased information or counselling, third-party authorization and restrictions regarding the type of health care providers or facilities that can provide abortion services.Multiple actions are needed at the legal, health system and community levels so that everyone who needs abortion care has access to it. The three cornerstones of an enabling environment for quality comprehensive abortion care are:respect for human rights, including a supportive framework of law and policy;the availability and accessibility of information; and a supportive, universally accessible, affordable and well functioning health system. A well-functioning health system implies many factors, including: evidence-based policies; universal health coverage; the reliable supply of quality, affordable medical products and equipment; that an adequate number of health workers, of different types, provide abortion care at a reachable distance to patients; the delivery of abortion care through a variety of approaches, e.g. care in health facilities, digital interventions and self-care approaches, allowing for choices depending on the values and preferences of the pregnant person, available resources, and the national and local context;that health workers are trained to provide safe and respectful abortion care, to support informed decision-making and to interpret laws and policies regulating abortion; that health workers are supported and protected from stigma; andprovision of contraception to prevent unintended pregnancies. Availability and accessibility of information implies: provision of evidence-based comprehensive sexuality education; andaccurate, non-biased and evidence-based information on abortion and contraceptive methods.WHO responseWHO provides global technical and policy guidance on the use of contraception to prevent unintended pregnancy, provision of information on abortion care, abortion management and post-abortion care. In 2022, WHO published an updated, consolidated guideline on abortion care, including all WHO recommendations and best practice statements across three domains essential to the provision of abortion care: law and policy, clinical services and service delivery. WHO also maintains the Global Abortion Policies Database. This interactive online database contains comprehensive information on the abortion laws, policies, health standards and guidelines for all countries. Upon request, WHO provides technical support to countries to adapt sexual and reproductive health guidelines to specific contexts and strengthen national policies and programmes related to contraception and safe abortion care. A quality abortion care monitoring and evaluation framework is also in development. WHO is a cosponsor of the HRP (UNDP/UNFPA/UNICEF/WHO/World Bank Special Programme of Research, Development and Research Training in Human Reproduction), which carries out research on clinical care, abortion regulation, abortion stigma, as well as implementation research on community and health systems approaches to quality abortion care. It also monitors the global burden of unsafe abortion and its consequences. 1 An “unsafe abortion” is defined as a procedure for terminating a pregnancy performed by persons lacking the necessary information or skills or in an environment not in conformity with minimal medical standards, or both. The persons, skills and medical standards considered safe in the provision of abortion are different for medical and surgical abortion and by pregnancy duration. In using this definition, what is considered ‘safe’ or unsafe needs to be interpreted in line with the most current WHO technical and policy guidance (2). (1) Bearak J, Popinchalk A, Ganatra B, Moller A-B, Tunçalp Ö, Beavin C et al. Unintended pregnancy and abortion by income, region, and the legal status of abortion: estimates from a comprehensive model for 1990–2019. Lancet Glob Health. 2020 Sep; 8(9):e1152-e1161. doi: 10.1016/S2214-109X(20)30315-6. (2) Ganatra B, Tunçalp Ö, Johnston H, Johnson BR, Gülmezoglu A, Temmerman M. From concept to measurement: Operationalizing WHO's definition of unsafe abortion. Bull World Health Organ 2014;92:155; 10.2471/BLT.14.136333.(3) Ganatra B, Gerdts C, Rossier C, Johnson Jr B R, Tuncalp Ö, Assifi A et al. Global, regional, and subregional classification of abortions by safety, 2010–14: estimates from a Bayesian hierarchical model. The Lancet. 2017 Sep.(4) Say L, Chou D, Gemmill A, Tunçalp Ö, Moller AB, Daniels J et al. Global causes of maternal death: a WHO systematic analysis. Lancet Glob Health. 2014 Jun; 2(6):e323-33.(5) Raymond EG, Grimes DA. The comparative safety of legal induced abortion and childbirth in the United States. Obstet Gynecol. 2012 Feb;119 :215-9. doi: 10.1097/AOG.0b013e31823fe923. PMID: 22270271.(6) Singh S, Maddow-Zimet I. Facility-based treatment for medical complications resulting from unsafe pregnancy termination in the developing world, 2012: a review of evidence from 26 countries. BJOG 2015; published online Aug 19. DOI:10.1111/1471-0528.13552.(7) Coast E, Lattof SR, Meulen Rodgers YV, Moore B, Poss C. The microeconomics of abortion: A scoping review and analysis of the economic consequences for abortion care-seekers. PLoS One. 2021 Jun 9;16(6):e0252005. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0252005. PMID: 34106927; PMCID: PMC8189560. (8) Lattof SR, Coast E, Rodgers YVM, Moore B, Poss C. The mesoeconomics of abortion: A scoping review and analysis of the economic effects of abortion on health systems. PLoS One. 2020 Nov 4;15(11):e0237227. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0237227. PMID: 33147223; PMCID: PMC7641432.(9) Rodgers YVM, Coast E, Lattof SR, Poss C, Moore B. The macroeconomics of abortion: A scoping review and analysis of the costs and outcomes. PLoS One. 2021 May 6;16(5):e0250692. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0250692. PMID: 33956826; PMCID: PMC8101771.(10). Vlassoff et al. Economic impact of unsafe abortion-related morbidity and mortality: evidence and estimation challenges. Brighton, Institute of Development Studies, 2008 .
Around 73 million induced abortions take place worldwide each year. Six out of 10 of all unintended pregnancies, and 3 out of 10 of all pregnancies, end in induced abortion (1).
Comprehensive abortion care is included in the list of essential health care services published by WHO in 2020. Abortion is a simple health care intervention that can be safely and effectively managed by a wide range of health workers using medication or a surgical procedure. In the first 12 weeks of pregnancy, a medical abortion can also be safely self-managed by the pregnant person outside of a health care facility , in whole or in part. This requires that the woman has access to accurate information, quality medicines and support from a trained health worker .
Comprehensive abortion care includes the provision of information, abortion management and post-abortion care. It encompasses care related to miscarriage , induced abortion , incomplete abortion as well as intrauterine fetal demise. The information in this fact sheet focuses on care related to induced abortion. When carried out using a method recommended by WHO appropriate to the pregnancy duration, and by someone with the necessary skills, abortion is a safe health care intervention (5). However, when people with unintended pregnancies face barriers to attaining safe, timely, affordable, geographically reachable, respectful and non-discriminatory abortion care, they often resort to unsafe abortion.1
Global estimates from 2010–2014 demonstrate that 45% of all induced abortions are unsafe. Of all unsafe abortions, one third were performed under the least safe conditions, i.e. by untrained persons using dangerous and invasive methods. More than half of all these unsafe abortions occurred in Asia, most of them in south and central Asia. In Latin American and Africa, the majority of all abortions were unsafe. In Africa, nearly half of all abortions occurred under the least safe circumstances (3).
Lack of access to safe, affordable, timely and respectful abortion care, and the stigma associated with abortion, pose risks to women’s physical and mental well-being throughout the life-course. Inaccessibility of quality abortion care risks violating a range of human rights of women and girls, including the right to life; the right to the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health; the right to benefit from scientific progress and its realization; the right to decide freely and responsibly on the number, spacing and timing of children; and the right to be free from torture, cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment and punishment. One review from 2003–12, found that 4.7-13% of maternal deaths were linked to abortive pregnancy outcomes (4) but noted that maternal deaths due to abortion, and more specifically unsafe abortion, are often misclassified and underreported given the stigma. Deaths from safe abortion are negligible, <1/100 000 (5). On the other hand, in regions where unsafe abortions are common, the death rates are high, at > 200/100 000 abortions. Estimates from 2012 indicate that in developing countries alone, 7 million women per year were treated in hospital facilities for complications of unsafe abortion (6). Physical health risks associated with unsafe abortion include:
Restrictive abortion regulation can cause distress and stigma, and risk constituting a violation of human rights of women and girls, including the right to privacy and the right to non-discrimination and equality, while also imposing financial burdens on women and girls. Regulations that force women to travel to attain legal care, or require mandatory counselling or waiting periods, lead to loss of income and other financial costs, and can make abortion inaccessible to women with low resources .
Estimates from 2006 show that complications of unsafe abortions cost health systems in developing countries US$ 553 million per year for post-abortion treatments. In addition, households experienced US$ 922 million in loss of income due to long-term disability related to unsafe abortion (10). Countries and health systems could make substantial monetary savings by providing greater access to modern contraception and quality induced abortion . Evidence shows that restricting access to abortions does not reduce the number of abortions (1); however, it does affect whether the abortions that women and girls attain are safe and dignified. The proportion of unsafe abortions are significantly higher in countries with highly restrictive abortion laws than in countries with less restrictive laws (2).
Barriers to accessing safe and respectful abortion include high costs, stigma for those seeking abortions and health care workers, and the refusal of health workers to provide an abortion based on personal conscience or religious belief. Access is further impeded by restrictive laws and requirements that are not medically justified, including criminalization of abortion, mandatory waiting periods, provision of biased information or counselling, third-party authorization and restrictions regarding the type of health care providers or facilities that can provide abortion services.
Multiple actions are needed at the legal, health system and community levels so that everyone who needs abortion care has access to it. The three cornerstones of an enabling environment for quality comprehensive abortion care are:
A well-functioning health system implies many factors, including: Availability and accessibility of information implies: WHO provides global technical and policy guidance on the use of contraception to prevent unintended pregnancy, provision of information on abortion care, abortion management and post-abortion care. In 2022, WHO published an updated, consolidated guideline on abortion care, including all WHO recommendations and best practice statements across three domains essential to the provision of abortion care: law and policy, clinical services and service delivery. WHO also maintains the Global Abortion Policies Database. This interactive online database contains comprehensive information on the abortion laws, policies, health standards and guidelines for all countries. Upon request, WHO provides technical support to countries to adapt sexual and reproductive health guidelines to specific contexts and strengthen national policies and programmes related to contraception and safe abortion care. A quality abortion care monitoring and evaluation framework is also in development. WHO is a cosponsor of the HRP (UNDP/UNFPA/UNICEF/WHO/World Bank Special Programme of Research, Development and Research Training in Human Reproduction), which carries out research on clinical care, abortion regulation, abortion stigma, as well as implementation research on community and health systems approaches to quality abortion care. It also monitors the global burden of unsafe abortion and its consequences.
1 An “unsafe abortion” is defined as a procedure for terminating a pregnancy performed by persons lacking the necessary information or skills or in an environment not in conformity with minimal medical standards, or both. The persons, skills and medical standards considered safe in the provision of abortion are different for medical and surgical abortion and by pregnancy duration. In using this definition, what is considered ‘safe’ or unsafe needs to be interpreted in line with the most current WHO technical and policy guidance (2).
(1) Bearak J, Popinchalk A, Ganatra B, Moller A-B, Tunçalp Ö, Beavin C et al. Unintended pregnancy and abortion by income, region, and the legal status of abortion: estimates from a comprehensive model for 1990–2019. Lancet Glob Health. 2020 Sep; 8(9):e1152-e1161. doi: 10.1016/S2214-109X(20)30315-6. (2) Ganatra B, Tunçalp Ö, Johnston H, Johnson BR, Gülmezoglu A, Temmerman M. From concept to measurement: Operationalizing WHO's definition of unsafe abortion. Bull World Health Organ 2014;92:155; 10.2471/BLT.14.136333.
(3) Ganatra B, Gerdts C, Rossier C, Johnson Jr B R, Tuncalp Ö, Assifi A et al. Global, regional, and subregional classification of abortions by safety, 2010–14: estimates from a Bayesian hierarchical model. The Lancet. 2017 Sep.
(4) Say L, Chou D, Gemmill A, Tunçalp Ö, Moller AB, Daniels J et al. Global causes of maternal death: a WHO systematic analysis. Lancet Glob Health. 2014 Jun; 2(6):e323-33.
(5) Raymond EG, Grimes DA. The comparative safety of legal induced abortion and childbirth in the United States. Obstet Gynecol. 2012 Feb;119 :215-9. doi: 10.1097/AOG.0b013e31823fe923. PMID: 22270271.
(6) Singh S, Maddow-Zimet I. Facility-based treatment for medical complications resulting from unsafe pregnancy termination in the developing world, 2012: a review of evidence from 26 countries. BJOG 2015; published online Aug 19. DOI:10.1111/1471-0528.13552.
(7) Coast E, Lattof SR, Meulen Rodgers YV, Moore B, Poss C. The microeconomics of abortion: A scoping review and analysis of the economic consequences for abortion care-seekers. PLoS One. 2021 Jun 9;16(6):e0252005. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0252005. PMID: 34106927; PMCID: PMC8189560. (8) Lattof SR, Coast E, Rodgers YVM, Moore B, Poss C. The mesoeconomics of abortion: A scoping review and analysis of the economic effects of abortion on health systems. PLoS One. 2020 Nov 4;15(11):e0237227. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0237227. PMID: 33147223; PMCID: PMC7641432.
(9) Rodgers YVM, Coast E, Lattof SR, Poss C, Moore B. The macroeconomics of abortion: A scoping review and analysis of the costs and outcomes. PLoS One. 2021 May 6;16(5):e0250692. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0250692. PMID: 33956826; PMCID: PMC8101771.
(10). Vlassoff et al. Economic impact of unsafe abortion-related morbidity and mortality: evidence and estimation challenges. Brighton, Institute of Development Studies, 2008 .
Related
Fact sheets
More
DatabaseGlobal Abortion Policies DatabaseRelated health topicAbortion
Global Abortion Policies Database
Abortion

========================================
abuse-of-older-people
========================================
Overview
The abuse of older people, also known as elder abuse, is a single or repeated act, or lack of appropriate action, occurring within any relationship where there is an expectation of trust, which causes harm or distress to an older person. This type of violence constitutes a violation of human rights and includes physical, sexual, psychological and emotional abuse; financial and material abuse; abandonment; neglect; and serious loss of dignity and respect.
Abuse of older people is an important public health problem. A 2017 review of 52 studies in 28 countries from diverse regions estimated that over the past year 1 in 6 people aged 60 years and older were subjected to some form of abuse (1). Although rigorous data are limited, the review provides prevalence estimates of the proportion of older people affected by different types of abuse .Data on the extent of the problem in institutions such as hospitals, nursing homes and other long-term care facilities are scarce. However, a review of recent studies on abuse of older people in institutional settings (2) indicates that 64.2% of staff reported perpetrating some form of abuse in the past year. Table 1: Systematic reviews and meta-analyses
Abuse of older people in community settings (1)
Abuse of older people in institutional settings (2)
Type of abuse
Reported by older adults
Reported by older adults and their proxies
Reported by staff Overall prevalence
15.7%
Not enough data
64.2% or 2 in 3 staff Psychological abuse: 11.6%
33.4%
32.5%
Physical abuse: 2.6%
14.1%
9.3%
Financial abuse: 6.8%
13.8%
Not enough data
Neglect: 4.2%
11.6%
12.0%
Sexual abuse: 0.9%
1.9%
0.7%
Emerging evidence indicates that the prevalence of abuse of older people in both the community and in institutions have increased during the COVID-19 pandemic. A US study, for instance, suggests that rates in the community may have increased by as much as 84% (3). Globally, the number of cases of elder abuse is projected to increase as many countries have rapidly ageing populations. Even if the proportion of victims of abuse of older people remains constant, the global number of victims will increase rapidly due to population ageing, growing to some 320 million victims by 2050, as the global population of people aged 60 years and more increases to 2 billion by 2050. Abuse of older people can have serious physical and mental health, financial, and social consequences, including, for instance, physical injuries, premature mortality, depression, cognitive decline, financial devastation and placement in nursing homes. For older people, the consequences of abuse can be especially serious and recovery may take longer (4).
Individual level characteristics which increase the risk of becoming a victim of abuse include functional dependence/disability, poor physical health, cognitive impairment, poor mental health and low income. Individual level characteristics which increase the risk of becoming a perpetrator of abuse include mental illness, substance abuse and dependency – often financial – of the abuser on the victim. At the relationship level, the type of relationship and marital status may be associated with an elevated risk of abuse, but these factors vary by country and region. Community- and societal-level factors linked to elder abuse may include ageism against older people and certain cultural norms . Social support and living alone reduce the likelihood of elder abuse (5). Many strategies have been tried to prevent and respond to abuse of older people, but evidence for the effectiveness of most of these interventions is limited at present. Strategies considered most promising include caregiver interventions, which provide services to relieve the burden of caregiving; money management programmes for older adults vulnerable to financial exploitation; helplines and emergency shelters; and multi-disciplinary teams, as the responses required often cut across many systems, including criminal justice, health care, mental health care, adults protective services and long-term care (5). In some countries, the health sector has taken a leading role in raising public concern about abuse of older people, while in others the social welfare sector has taken the lead. Globally, too little is known about elder abuse and how to prevent it, particularly in developing countries.
On 15 June 2022, World Elder Abuse Awareness Day, WHO and partners published “Tackling abuse of older people: five priorities for the UN Decade of Healthy Ageing ”. These five priorities, arrived at through wide consultation, are:
(1) Elder abuse prevalence in community settings: a systematic review and meta-analysis.Yon Y, Mikton CR, Gassoumis ZD, Wilber KH. Lancet Glob Health. 2017 Feb;5(2):e147-e156.https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28104184 (2) The prevalence of elder abuse in institutional settings: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Yon Y, Ramiro-Gonzalez M, Mikton C, Huber M, Sethi D. European Journal of Public Health 2018. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29878101
(3) High prevalence of elder abuse during the COVID-19 pandemic: risk and resilience factors. Chang ES, Levy BR. The American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry. 2021. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33518464/ (4) The mortality of elder mistreatment.Lachs MS, Williams CS, O'Brien S, Pillemer KA, Charlson ME. JAMA. 1998 Aug 5;280(5):428-32.https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9701077
(5) Elder Abuse: Global Situation, Risk Factors, and Prevention Strategies. Pillmer K, Burnes D, Riffin C, Lachs M. The Gerontologist. 2016; 56(2); 194-205. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26994260/ Related
Fact sheets

========================================
Adolescent-and-young-adult-health
========================================
Survival chances for adolescents and young adults vary greatly across the world. In 2021, the average probability of a 10-year-old dying before age 24 was about 6 times higher in sub-Saharan Africa than in North America and Europe.
Within the age group 10–24 years, mortality rates are lowest among adolescents aged 10–14, and highest among young adults aged 20–24 years. Females generally have lower mortality rates for these ages than males.
The patterns of death of 10–14-year-olds are dominated by infectious diseases. Among older adolescents and young adults, a shift away from infectious diseases of childhood is seen, towards accidents and injuries, self-harm and interpersonal violence. Sex differences in mortality rates also become apparent in adolescence. Many unintentional injuries such as road traffic and drowning are the leading cause of death and disability among adolescents. In 2021, over 100 000 adolescents died from road traffic accidents. Many of those who died were vulnerable road users, including pedestrians, cyclists or users of motorized two-wheelers. Injuries and violence fact sheet
Drowning is also among the top causes of death among adolescents; more than 40 000 adolescents, over three quarters of them boys, are estimated to have drowned in 2021.
Drowning fact sheet
Interpersonal violence is among the leading causes of death in adolescents and young people globally. Its prominence varies substantially by world region. It causes nearly a third of all adolescent male deaths in the WHO Region of the Americas. Violence during adolescence also increases the risks of injury, HIV and other sexually transmitted infections, mental health problems, poor school performance and dropout, early pregnancy, reproductive health problems, and communicable and noncommunicable diseases.
Youth violence fact sheet
Drinking alcohol among adolescents is a major concern in many countries. Worldwide, more than a quarter of all people aged 15–19 years are current drinkers, amounting to 155 million adolescents. Prevalence of heavy episodic drinking among adolescents aged 15­–19 years was 13.6% in 2016, with males most at risk.
Cannabis is the most widely used psychoactive drug among young people with about 4.7% of people aged 15–16 years using it at least once in 2018. Alcohol and drug use in children and adolescents is associated with neurocognitive alterations which can lead to behavioural, emotional, social and academic problems in later life.
Alcohol fact sheet
The vast majority of people using tobacco today began doing so when they were adolescents. Globally in 2018, at least 1 in 10 adolescents aged 13–15 years uses tobacco, although there are areas where this figure is much higher. E-cigarettes are particularly risky when used by children and adolescents. Nicotine is highly addictive and young people’s brains develop up to their mid-twenties.
Tobacco fact sheet
E-cigarettes: how risky are they?
Depression and anxiety are among the leading causes of illness and disability among adolescents, and suicide is among the leading causes of death in people aged 15–19 years. Half of all mental health disorders in adulthood start by age 18, but most cases are undetected and untreated.
Many factors have an impact on the well-being and mental health of adolescents. Violence, poverty, stigma, exclusion, and living in humanitarian and fragile settings can increase the risk of developing mental health problems. Adolescent mental health fact sheet
HIV
An estimated 1.7 million adolescents were living with HIV in 2021 with around 90% in the WHO African Region. While there have been substantial declines in new infections amongst adolescents from a peak in 1994, adolescents still account for about 10% of new HIV infections, with three-quarters amongst adolescent girls. Additionally, while new infections may have fallen in many of the most severely affected countries, recent testing coverage remains low suggesting that many adolescents and young people living with HIV may not know their status.
HIV fact sheet
HIV facts in pictures
Tuberculosis
Tuberculosis (TB) is a preventable and curable disease, but it continues to impact the lives and development of millions of children and adolescents. Children and young adolescents aged under 15 years represent about 11% of all people with TB globally. This means 1.1 million children and young adolescents aged under 15 years fall ill with TB every year, and more than 225 000 of them lose their lives.
Adolescents and young adults usually present with bacteriologically infectious TB characterized by cavities seen on chest x-rays. The Global Tuberculosis Report shows that notification rates in adolescents aged 15–19 years are relatively high compared with younger adolescents. Tuberculosis fact sheet
Other infectious diseases
Diarrhoea and lower respiratory tract infections are estimated to be among the top five causes of death for adolescents 10–14 years, with mortality rates being particularly high in African low- and middle-income countries. Thanks to improved childhood vaccination, adolescent deaths and disability from measles have fallen markedly. Diarrhoeal disease fact sheet
Pneumonia fact sheet
Measles fact sheet
Early adolescence is the optimal time for vaccination against HPV infection and it is estimated that if 90% of girls globally get the HPV vaccine more than 40 million lives could be saved over the next century. However, it is estimated that in 2021 only 12% of girls globally received the vaccine.
Human papillomavirus and cervical cancer fact sheet
Overall there are proportionally fewer cases of and deaths from COVID-19 disease for adolescents and young adults than for older adults. However, the pandemic has severe indirect negative effects on young people’s well-being, including on their mental health, loss of education time through school closures, social isolation, physical inactivity, malnutrition and domestic violence.
Approximately 12 million girls aged 15–19 years and at least 777 000 girls under 15 years give birth each year in developing regions. Complications from pregnancy and childbirth are among the leading causes of death for girls aged 15–19 years globally.
The global adolescent birth rate in 2021 was 42 births per 1000 girls this age, and country rates range from 1 to over 200 births per 1000 girls annually. This indicates a marked decrease since 1990. This decrease is reflected in a similar decline in maternal mortality rates among girls aged 15–19 years.
One of the specific targets of the health Sustainable Development Goal is that by 2030, the world should ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive health-care services, including for family planning, information and education, and the integration of reproductive health into national strategies and programmes.
Adolescent pregnancy fact sheet
Many of the main causes of mortality in adolescents and young adults have strong links to the environment, including unintentional injuries and infectious diseases. Young people are at increased risk of environmental hazards and pollution due to their developmental physiology and immature systems. Primary environmental hazards and pollution affecting the health of adolescents and young adults include air pollution, chemicals and heavy metals, climate change, UV radiation, urban health and WASH. WHO's work on children's environmental health
Globally, in 2016, over 1 in 6 adolescents aged 10–19 years was overweight. Prevalence varied across WHO regions, from lower than 10% in the WHO South-East Asia Region to over 30% in the WHO Region of the Americas. Obesity and overweight fact sheet
Many boys and girls in developing countries enter adolescence undernourished, making them more vulnerable to disease and early death.
Iron deficiency anaemia was among the leading causes of healthy years of life lost due to disability by adolescents aged 10–19 in 2021. Iron and folic acid supplements are a solution that also helps to promote health of adolescents. Regular deworming in areas where intestinal helminths such as hookworm are common is recommended to prevent micronutrient deficiencies.
Malnutrition fact sheet
Healthy diet fact sheet
Globally, in 2016, only 1 in 5 adolescents are estimated to meet WHO guidelines on physical activity. Prevalence of inactivity is high across all WHO regions, and higher in female as compared to male adolescents (8).
Physical activity fact sheet
The rights of children under 18 years to survive, grow and develop are enshrined in international legal documents. In 2013, the Committee on the Rights of the Child published guidelines on the right of children to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of health, and a General Comment on realizing the rights of children during adolescence was published in 2016. It highlights states’ obligations to recognize the special health and development needs and rights of young people.
The Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women also sets out the rights of women and girls to health and adequate health care.
WHO works with Member States and partners to improve the health of young people by producing evidence-based guidelines, advocating and providing recommendations for adolescent-responsive health systems, and documenting progress in adolescent health and development.
In 2023, WHO published an update of the Global Accelerated Action for the Health of Adolescents : Guidance to support country implementation. AA-HA! 2.0 has drawn on inputs received during consultations with Member States, United Nations agencies, adolescents and young people, civil society and other partners. It aims to assist governments in deciding what they plan to do and how they plan to do it as they respond to the health needs of adolescents.
To improve adolescent health measurement globally, WHO in collaboration with UNAIDS, UNESCO, UNFAP, UNICEF, UN Women, the World Bank Group, and the World Food Programme , has established the Global Action for Measurement of Adolescent health Advisory Group. A comprehensive set of 47 priority indicators for global, regional and national adolescent health measurement has been published in 2024 using a structured participatory process.
References
Related
News
Fact sheets
Feature stories
Events
Commentaries

========================================
Adolescent pregnancy
========================================
Adolescent pregnancy is a global phenomenon with clearly known causes and serious health, social and economic consequences. Globally, the adolescent birth rate has decreased, but rates of change have been uneven across regions. There are also enormous variations in levels between and within countries. Adolescent pregnancy tends to be higher among those with less education or of low economic status. Further, there is slower progress in reducing adolescent first births amongst these and other vulnerable groups, leading to increasing inequity. Child marriage and child sexual abuse place girls at increased risk of pregnancy, often unintended. In many places, barriers to obtaining and using contraceptives prevent adolescents from avoiding unintended pregnancies. There is growing attention being paid to improving access to quality maternal care for pregnant and parenting adolescents. WHO works with partners to advocate for attention to adolescent pregnancy, to build an evidence base for action, to develop policy and programme support tools, to build capacity and to support countries to address adolescent pregnancy effectively.
Every year, an estimated 21 million girls aged 15–19 years in developing regions become pregnant and approximately 12 million of them give birth (1).
Globally, ABR has decreased from 64.5 births per 1000 women in 2000 to 41.3 births per 1000 women in 2023. However, rates of change have been uneven in different regions of the world with the sharpest decline in Southern Asia (SA), and slower declines in the Latin American and Caribbean and sub-Saharan Africa regions. Although declines have occurred in all regions, SSA and LAC continue have the highest rates globally at 97.9 and 51.4 births per 1000 women, respectively, in 2023 (3).
There are enormous differences within regions in ABR as well. In the WHO African Region, the estimated ABR was 97 per 1000 adolescent in 2023 compared to 13.1 per 1000 adolescent girls in the European Region (3). Even within countries, there are enormous variations, for example in Zambia the percentage of adolescent girls aged 15–19 who have begun childbearing ranged from 14.9% in Lusaka to 42.5% in the Southern Province in 2018 (4). In the Philippines, this ranged from 3.5% in the Cordillera Administrative Region to 17.9% in the Davao Peninsula Region in 2017 (5).
While the estimated global ABR has declined, the actual number of childbirths to adolescents continues to be high. The largest number of estimated births to 15–19-year-olds in 2021 occurred in SSA , whereas far fewer births occurred in Central Asia . The corresponding number was 332 000 among adolescents aged 10–14 years in SSA, compared to 22 000 in South-East Asia in the same year (3).
Studies of risk and protective factors related to adolescent pregnancy in LMICs indicate that levels tend to be higher among those with less education or of low economic status (6). Progress in reducing adolescent first births has been particularly slow amongst these vulnerable groups, leading to increasing inequity.
Several factors contribute to adolescent pregnancies and births. First, in many societies, girls are under pressure to marry and bear children. As of 2021, the estimated global number of child brides was 650 million: child marriage places girls at increased risk of pregnancy because girls who are married very early typically have limited autonomy to influence decision-making about delaying child-bearing and contraceptive use. Second, in many places, girls choose to become pregnant because they have limited educational and employment prospects and motherhood is valued. Contraceptives are not easily accessible to adolescents in many places. Even when adolescents can obtain contraceptives, they may lack the agency or the resources to pay for them, knowledge on where to obtain them and how to correctly use them. They may face stigma when trying to obtain contraceptives. Further, they are often at higher risk of discontinuing use due to side effects, and due to changing life circumstances and reproductive intentions. Restrictive laws and policies regarding the provision of contraceptives based on age or marital status pose an important barrier to the provision and uptake of contraceptives among adolescents. This is often combined with health worker bias and/or lack of willingness to acknowledge adolescents’ sexual health needs.
Child sexual abuse increases the risk of unintended pregnancies. A WHO report published in 2021 estimates that 120 million girls aged under 20 years were subjected to sexual violence by someone other than a partner. This abuse is deeply rooted in gender inequality; it affects more girls than boys, although many boys are also affected. Estimates suggest that in 2020, at least 1 in 8 of the world’s children had been sexually abused before reaching the age of 18, and 1 in 20 girls aged 15–19 years had experienced forced sex during their lifetime.
The WHO report titled Violence against women prevalence estimates 2018 notes that “adolescents aged 15–19 years are estimated to have already been subjected to physical and/or sexual violence from an intimate partner at least once in their lifetime, and 16% of adolescent girls and young women aged 15–19 have been subjected to this violence within the past 12 months.”
Preventing adolescent pregnancy and childbearing as well as child marriage is part of the SDG agenda with dedicated indicators, including indicator 3.7.2, “Adolescent birth rate per 1000 women in that age group,” and 5.3.1, “Proportion of women aged 20–24 years married before the age of 18 years.”
Strategies and interventions related to adolescent pregnancy have focused on pregnancy prevention. However, there is growing attention being paid to improving access to and quality of maternal care for pregnant and parenting adolescents. Available data on access paints a mixed picture. Access to quality care depends on the geographic context and the social status of adolescents. Even where access is not limited, adolescents appear to receive a lower quality of both clinical care and interpersonal support than adult women do.
WHO works with partners to advocate for attention to adolescents, build the evidence and epidemiologic base for action, develop and test programme support tools, build capacity, and pilot initiatives in the small but growing number of countries that recognize the need to address adolescents’ sexual and reproductive health. As a result of these collective efforts, adolescent health has moved to the centre of the global health and development agenda. In this evolving context, WHO continues its work across sectors to support countries to address adolescent pregnancy effectively in the context of their national programmes, and to prevent child marriage and provide care and support to married adolescents.
Adolescent pregnancy is a global phenomenon with clearly known causes and serious health, social and economic consequences to individuals, families and communities. There is consensus on the evidence-based actions needed to prevent it. There is growing global, regional and national commitment to preventing child marriage and adolescent pregnancy and childbearing. Nongovernmental organizations have led the effort in several countries. In a growing number of countries, governments are taking the lead to put in place large-scale programmes. They challenge and inspire other countries to do what is doable and urgently needs to be done – now. References
Related
Fact sheets
More
Global Accelerated Action for the Health of Adolescents Preventing early pregnancy and poor reproductive outcomes among adolescents in developing countriesWHA resolution: Youth and health risksEarly marriages, adolescent and young pregnancies - Report to the World Health Assembly

========================================
Ageing and health
========================================
People worldwide are living longer. Today most people can expect to live into their sixties and beyond. Every country in the world is experiencing growth in both the size and the proportion of older persons in the population. By 2030, 1 in 6 people in the world will be aged 60 years or over. At this time the share of the population aged 60 years and over will increase from 1 billion in 2020 to 1.4 billion. By 2050, the world’s population of people aged 60 years and older will double . The number of persons aged 80 years or older is expected to triple between 2020 and 2050 to reach 426 million.
While this shift in distribution of a country's population towards older ages – known as population ageing – started in high-income countries , it is now low- and middle-income countries that are experiencing the greatest change. By 2050, two-thirds of the world’s population over 60 years will live in low- and middle-income countries.
At the biological level, ageing results from the impact of the accumulation of a wide variety of molecular and cellular damage over time. This leads to a gradual decrease in physical and mental capacity, a growing risk of disease and ultimately death. These changes are neither linear nor consistent, and they are only loosely associated with a person’s age in years. The diversity seen in older age is not random. Beyond biological changes, ageing is often associated with other life transitions such as retirement, relocation to more appropriate housing and the death of friends and partners. Common conditions in older age include hearing loss, cataracts and refractive errors, back and neck pain and osteoarthritis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, diabetes, depression and dementia. As people age, they are more likely to experience several conditions at the same time.
Older age is also characterized by the emergence of several complex health states commonly called geriatric syndromes. They are often the consequence of multiple underlying factors and include frailty, urinary incontinence, falls, delirium and pressure ulcers. A longer life brings with it opportunities, not only for older people and their families, but also for societies as a whole. Additional years provide the chance to pursue new activities such as further education, a new career or a long-neglected passion. Older people also contribute in many ways to their families and communities. Yet the extent of these opportunities and contributions depends heavily on one factor: health.
Evidence suggests that the proportion of life in good health has remained broadly constant, implying that the additional years are in poor health. If people can experience these extra years of life in good health and if they live in a supportive environment, their ability to do the things they value will be little different from that of a younger person. If these added years are dominated by declines in physical and mental capacity, the implications for older people and for society are more negative.
Although some of the variations in older people’s health are genetic, most is due to people’s physical and social environments – including their homes, neighbourhoods, and communities, as well as their personal characteristics – such as their sex, ethnicity, or socioeconomic status. The environments that people live in as children – or even as developing fetuses – combined with their personal characteristics, have long-term effects on how they age. Physical and social environments can affect health directly or through barriers or incentives that affect opportunities, decisions and health behaviour. Maintaining healthy behaviours throughout life, particularly eating a balanced diet, engaging in regular physical activity and refraining from tobacco use, all contribute to reducing the risk of non-communicable diseases, improving physical and mental capacity and delaying care dependency.
Supportive physical and social environments also enable people to do what is important to them, despite losses in capacity. The availability of safe and accessible public buildings and transport, and places that are easy to walk around, are examples of supportive environments. In developing a public-health response to ageing, it is important not just to consider individual and environmental approaches that ameliorate the losses associated with older age, but also those that may reinforce recovery, adaptation and psychosocial growth.
There is no typical older person. Some 80-year-olds have physical and mental capacities similar to many 30-year-olds. Other people experience significant declines in capacities at much younger ages. A comprehensive public health response must address this wide range of older people’s experiences and needs.
The diversity seen in older age is not random. A large part arises from people’s physical and social environments and the impact of these environments on their opportunities and health behaviour. The relationship we have with our environments is skewed by personal characteristics such as the family we were born into, our sex and our ethnicity, leading to inequalities in health. Older people are often assumed to be frail or dependent and a burden to society. Public health professionals, and society as a whole, need to address these and other ageist attitudes, which can lead to discrimination, affect the way policies are developed and the opportunities older people have to experience healthy aging.
Globalization, technological developments , urbanization, migration and changing gender norms are influencing the lives of older people in direct and indirect ways. A public health response must take stock of these current and projected trends and frame policies accordingly.
The United Nations (UN) General Assembly declared 2021–2030 the UN Decade of Healthy Ageing and asked WHO to lead the implementation. The UN Decade of Healthy Ageing is a global collaboration bringing together governments, civil society, international agencies, professionals, academia, the media and the private sector for 10 years of concerted, catalytic and collaborative action to foster longer and healthier lives.
The Decade builds on the WHO Global Strategy and Action Plan and the United Nations Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing and supports the realization of the United Nations Agenda 2030 on Sustainable Development and the Sustainable Development Goals. The UN Decade of Healthy Ageing seeks to reduce health inequities and improve the lives of older people, their families and communities through collective action in four areas: changing how we think, feel and act towards age and ageism; developing communities in ways that foster the abilities of older people; delivering person-centred integrated care and primary health services responsive to older people; and providing older people who need it with access to quality long-term care.
Related
News
Fact sheets
Feature stories
Events
Commentaries
More
Age-friendly World

========================================
Alcohol
========================================
Alcohol and alcoholic beverages contain ethanol, which is a psychoactive and toxic substance with dependence-producing properties. Alcohol has been widely used in many cultures for centuries, but it is associated with significant health risks and harms. Worldwide, 2.6 million deaths were attributable to alcohol consumption in 2019, of which 2 million were among men and 0.6 million among women. The highest levels of alcohol-related deaths per 100 000 persons are observed in the WHO European and African Regions with 52.9 deaths and 52.2 deaths per 100 000 people, respectively.
People of younger age are disproportionately affected by alcohol consumption with the highest proportion of alcohol-attributable deaths occurring within this age group in 2019.
The data on global alcohol consumption in 2019 shows that an estimated 400 million people aged 15 years and older live with alcohol use disorders, and an estimated 209 million live with alcohol dependence.
There has been some progress; from 2010 to 2019, the number of alcohol-attributable deaths per 100 000 people decreased by 20.2% globally. There has been a steady increase in the number of countries developing national alcohol policies. Almost all countries implement alcohol excise taxes. However, countries report continued interference from the alcohol industry in policy development.
Based on 2019 data, about 54% out of 145 reporting countries had national guidelines/standards for specialized treatment services for alcohol use disorders, but only 46% of countries had legal regulations to protect the confidentiality of people in treatment. Access to screening, brief intervention and treatment for people with hazardous alcohol use and alcohol use disorder remains very low, as well as access to medications for treatment of alcohol use disorders. Overall, the proportion of people with alcohol use disorders in contact with treatment services varies from less than 1% to no more than 14% in all countries where such data are available.
Alcohol consumption is found to play a causal role in more than 200 diseases, injuries and other health conditions. However, the global burden of disease and injuries caused by alcohol consumption can be quantified for only 31 health conditions on the basis of the available scientific evidence for the role of alcohol use in their development, occurrence and outcomes. Drinking alcohol is associated with risks of developing noncommunicable diseases such as liver diseases, heart diseases, and different types of cancers, as well as mental health and behavioural conditions such as depression, anxiety and alcohol use disorders.
An estimated 474 000 deaths from cardiovascular diseases were caused by alcohol consumption in 2019. Alcohol is an established carcinogen and alcohol consumption increases the risk of several cancers, including breast, liver, head and neck, oesophageal and colorectal cancers. In 2019, 4.4% of cancers diagnosed globally and 401 000 cancer deaths were attributed to alcohol consumption.
Alcohol consumption also causes significant harm to others, not just to the person consuming alcohol. A significant part of alcohol-attributable disease burden arises from injuries such as road traffic accidents. In 2019, of a total of 298 000 deaths from alcohol-related road crashes, 156 000 deaths were caused by someone else’s drinking. Other injuries, intentional or unintentional, include falls, drowning, burns, sexual assault, intimate partner violence and suicide. A causal relationship has been established between alcohol use and the incidence or outcomes of infectious diseases such as tuberculosis and HIV.
Alcohol consumption during pregnancy increases the risk of having a child with fetal alcohol spectrum disorders , the most severe form of which is fetal alcohol syndrome , which is associated with developmental disabilities and birth defects. Alcohol consumption during pregnancy can also increase the risk of pre-term birth complications including miscarriage, stillbirth and premature delivery. Younger people are disproportionately negatively affected by alcohol consumption, with the highest proportion of alcohol-attributable deaths in 2019 occurring among people aged between 20 and 39 years.
In the long term, harmful and hazardous levels of alcohol consumption can lead to social problems including family problems, issues at work, financial problems, and unemployment.
There is no form of alcohol consumption that is risk-free. Even low levels of alcohol consumption carry some risks and can cause harm.
The level of risk depends on several factors, including the amount consumed, frequency of drinking, the health status of the individual, age, sex, and other personal characteristics, as well as the context in which alcohol consumption occurs. Some groups and individuals who are vulnerable or at risk may have a higher susceptibility to the toxic, psychoactive and dependence-inducing properties of alcohol. On the other hand, individuals who adopt lower-risk patterns of alcohol consumption may not necessarily face a significantly increased likelihood of negative health and social consequences.
Societal factors which affect the levels and patterns of alcohol consumption and related problems include cultural and social norms, availability of alcohol, level of economic development, and implementation and enforcement of alcohol policies. The impact of alcohol consumption on chronic and acute health outcomes is largely determined by the total volume of alcohol consumed and the pattern of drinking, particularly those patterns which are associated with the frequency of drinking and episodes of heavy drinking. Most alcohol related harms come from heavy episodic or heavy continuous alcohol consumption.
The context plays an important role in the occurrence of alcohol-related harm, particularly as a result of alcohol intoxication. Alcohol consumption can have an impact not only on the incidence of diseases, injuries and other health conditions, but also on their outcomes and how these evolve over time.
There are gender differences in both alcohol consumption and alcohol-related mortality and morbidity. In 2019, 52% of men were current drinkers, while only 35% of women had been drinking alcohol in the last 12 months. Alcohol per capita consumption was, on average, 8.2 litres for men compared to 2.2 litres for women. In 2019, alcohol use was responsible for 6.7% of all deaths among men and 2.4% of all deaths among women. The Global alcohol action plan 2022–2030, endorsed by WHO Member States, aims to reduce the harmful use of alcohol through effective, evidence-based strategies at national, regional and global levels. The plan outlines six key areas for action: high-impact strategies and interventions, advocacy and awareness, partnership and coordination, technical support and capacity-building, knowledge production and information systems, and resource mobilization. Implementation of global strategy and action plan will accelerate global progress towards attaining alcohol-related targets under the Sustainable Development Goal 3.5 on strengthening the prevention and treatment of substance abuse, including narcotic drug abuse and harmful use of alcohol. Achieving this will require global, regional and national actions on the levels, patterns and contexts of alcohol consumption and the wider social determinants of health, with a particular focus on implementing high-impact cost effective interventions. It is vital to address the determinants that drive the acceptability, availability and affordability of alcohol consumption through cross-sectoral, comprehensive and integrated policy measures. It is also of critical importance to achieve universal health coverage for people living with alcohol use disorders and other health conditions due to alcohol use by strengthening health system responses and developing comprehensive and accessible systems of treatment and care that for those in need.
The SAFER initiative, launched in 2018 by WHO and partners, supports countries to implement the high-impact, cost-effective interventions proven to reduce the harm caused by alcohol consumption. The WHO Global Information System on Alcohol and Health presents data on levels and patterns of alcohol consumption, alcohol-attributable health and social consequences and policy responses across the world.
Achieving a reduction in the harmful use of alcohol in line with the targets included in the Global alcohol action plan, the SDG 2030 agenda and the WHO Global monitoring framework for noncommunicable diseases, requires concerted action by countries and effective global governance. Public policies and interventions to prevent and reduce alcohol-related harm should be guided and formulated by public health interests and based on clear public health goals and the best available evidence. Engaging all relevant stakeholders is essential but the potential conflicts of interest, particularly with the alcohol industry, must be carefully assessed before engagement. Economic operators should refrain from activities that might prevent, delay or stop the development, enactment, implementation and enforcement of high-impact strategies and interventions to reduce the harmful use of alcohol. By working together, with due diligence and protection from conflicts of interest, the negative health and social consequences of alcohol can be effectively reduced.
Related
Global status report on alcohol and health and treatment of substance use disorders
Global strategy to reduce the harmful use of alcohol
Global Alcohol Action Plan 2022–2030
SAFER Alcohol Control Initiative
More on alcohol
News

========================================
Ambient (outdoor) air pollution
========================================
Outdoor air pollution is a major environmental health problem affecting everyone in low-, middle-, and high-income countries.
Ambient air pollution in both cities and rural areas was estimated to cause 4.2 million premature deaths worldwide per year in 2019; this mortality is due to exposure to fine particulate matter, which causes cardiovascular and respiratory disease, and cancers.
WHO estimates that in 2019, some 68% of outdoor air pollution related premature deaths were due to ischaemic heart disease and stroke, 14% were due to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, 14% were due to acute lower respiratory infections, and 4% of deaths were due to lung cancers.
People living in low- and middle-income countries disproportionately experience the burden of outdoor air pollution with 89% occurring in these areas. The greatest burden is found in the WHO South-East Asia and Western Pacific Regions. The latest burden estimates reflect the significant role air pollution plays in cardiovascular illness and death. Addressing air pollution, which is the second highest risk factor for noncommunicable diseases, is key to protecting public health.
Most sources of outdoor air pollution are well beyond the control of individuals and this demands concerted action by local, national and regional level policy-makers working in sectors like energy, transport, waste management, urban planning and agriculture.
There are many examples of successful policies that reduce air pollution:
Particulate matter (PM)PM is a common proxy indicator for air pollution. There is strong evidence for the negative health impacts associated with exposure to this pollutant. The major components of PM are sulfates, nitrates, ammonia, sodium chloride, black carbon, mineral dust and water.
Carbon monoxide (CO)Carbon monoxide is a colourless, odourless and tasteless toxic gas produced by the incomplete combustion of carbonaceous fuels such as wood, petrol, charcoal, natural gas and kerosene. Ozone (O3)Ozone at ground level – not to be confused with the ozone layer in the upper atmosphere – is one of the major constituents of photochemical smog and it is formed through the reaction with gases in the presence of sunlight.
Nitrogen dioxide NO2 is a gas that is commonly released from the combustion of fuels in the transportation and industrial sectors.
Sulfur dioxide SO2 is a colourless gas with a sharp odour. It is produced from the burning of fossil fuels and the smelting of mineral ores that contain sulfur.
To read more details about these pollutants and other types, please visit this page.
The WHO Global air quality guidelines offer global guidance on thresholds and limits for key air pollutants that pose health risks. These guidelines are of a high methodological quality and are developed through a transparent, evidence-based decision-making process. In addition to the guideline values, the WHO Global air quality guidelines provide interim targets to promote a gradual shift from high to lower concentrations and their associated health benefits. For example, through the achievement of interim target one , around 300 000 deaths would be saved worldwide annually.
The guidelines also offer qualitative statements on good practices for the management of certain types of particulate matter (PM), for example black carbon/elemental carbon, ultrafine particles, and particles originating from sand and dust storms, for which there is insufficient quantitative evidence to derive AQG levels.
Recognizing the gravity and urgency of the problem, all WHO Member States approved resolution A68.8, “Health and the Environment: addressing the health impact of air pollution,” at the World Health Assembly in 2015, complemented by a road map for action the following year. WHO, as the coordinating authority on international health, supports countries in protecting public health through evidence-based policies and actions. Considering the significant health burden and the multiple potential benefits of interventions, WHO supports countries by providing evidence, building institutional capacity and leveraging the health argument to convene sectors to tackle air pollution. To support reducing air pollution levels and to protect populations from healthrisks, WHO’s Air Quality and Health Unit works in three cross-cutting areas:1. knowledge, evidence and measuring progress2. institutional capacity building and technical support3. leadership and coordination.Member States and sub-national entities are typically responsible for the implementation andmonitoring of policies to promote air quality for health. Successful policiesand solid governance depend on coordinated action between a variety of stakeholders and sec-tors. Cooperation with other UN agencies and non-state actors is essential and is integratedinto WHO’s work to ensure synergies and maximize impact on the ground. A full list of WHO’s activities to combat ambient air pollution can be found here and here. Related
News
Fact sheets
Facts in pictures
Feature stories
Documents

========================================
anaemia
========================================
Anaemia is a condition in which the number of red blood cells or the haemoglobin concentration within them is lower than normal. It mainly affects women and children.
Anaemia occurs when there isn’t enough haemoglobin in the body to carry oxygen to the organs and tissues.
In severe cases, anaemia can cause poor cognitive and motor development in children. It can also cause problems for pregnant women and their babies.
Anaemia can be caused by poor nutrition, infections, chronic diseases, heavy menstruation, pregnancy issues and family history. It is often caused by a lack of iron in the blood.
Anaemia is preventable and treatable.
In many low- and lower-middle income settings, the most commonly- recognized causes of anaemia are iron deficiency and malaria.
The population groups most vulnerable to anaemia include children under 5 years of age, particularly infants and children under 2 years of age, menstruating adolescent girls and women, and pregnant and postpartum women.
Anaemia is estimated to affect half a billion women 15–49 years of age and 269 million children 6–59 months of age worldwide. In 2019, 30% of non-pregnant women and 37% of pregnant women aged 15–49 years were affected by anaemia. The WHO Regions of Africa and South-East Asia are most affected with an estimated 106 million women and 103 million children affected by anaemia in Africa and 244 million women and 83 million children affected in South-East Asia.
Common and non-specific symptoms of anaemia include: Severe anaemia can cause more serious symptoms including:
Anaemia is diagnosed based on blood haemoglobin concentrations falling below specified thresholds established based on age, sex, and physiological status. It is considered a symptom of an underlying condition(s).
Anaemia may be caused by several factors: nutrient deficiencies, inadequate diet , infections, inflammation, chronic diseases, gynaecological and obstetric conditions, and inherited red blood cell disorders.
Iron deficiency, primarily due to inadequate dietary iron intake, is considered the most common nutritional deficiency leading to anaemia. Deficiencies in vitamin A, folate, vitamin B12 and riboflavin can also result in anaemia due to their specific roles in the synthesis of haemoglobin and/or erythrocyte production. Additional mechanisms include nutrient losses , impaired absorption, low iron stores at birth, and nutrient interactions affecting iron bioavailability.
Infections can be another important cause of anaemia, depending on the local burden of infectious diseases, such as malaria, tuberculosis, HIV and parasitic infections. Infections can impair nutrient absorption and metabolism or can cause nutrient loss . Many different chronic conditions can cause inflammation and lead to anaemia of inflammation or anaemia of chronic disease. HIV infection causes anaemia through a wide range of mechanisms including ineffective production or excessive destruction of red blood cells, blood loss, and side effects of the drug treatment.
Consistent heavy menstrual losses, maternal blood volume expansion during pregnancy, and blood loss during and after childbirth, particularly in cases of postpartum haemorrhage, commonly lead to anaemia.
Additionally, in some regions, inherited red blood cell disorders are a common cause of anaemia. These include conditions such as α- and β-thalassemia due to abnormalities of haemoglobin synthesis, sickle cell disorders due to changes in the haemoglobin structure, other haemoglobinopathies due to haemoglobin gene variants, abnormalities of red cell enzymes, or abnormalities of the red blood cell membrane.
The treatment and prevention of anaemia depend on the underlying cause of the condition. There are many effective ways to treat and prevent anaemia. Changes in diet can help reduce anaemia in some cases, including:
Other health conditions can cause anaemia. Actions include:
There are several ways to help prevent and manage anaemia in daily life, including eating a healthy and diverse diet and speaking to a health-care provider early if you have symptoms of anaemia.
To keep a healthy and diverse diet:
If you take calcium and iron supplements, take them at different times during the day.
People with heavy menstrual bleeding should see their doctor for treatment. Doctors may recommend iron supplements or hormonal contraceptives. Some infections can cause anaemia. Wash your hands with soap and water and use clean toilets to reduce the risk of infection.
Malaria can also cause anaemia. People living in places where malaria is common should follow prevention advice from local health authorities. Seek prompt treatment if you suspect you have malaria.
The consequences of anaemia can vary. It can affect school performance (through developmental delays and behavioural disturbances such as decreased motor activity, social interaction and attention to tasks), productivity in adult life and overall quality of life in general. During pregnancy, anaemia has been associated with poor maternal and birth outcomes, including premature birth, low birth weight and maternal mortality. In addition to the health consequences, anaemia can have important financial impacts for individuals, families, communities and countries. It is estimated that for every US$ 1 invested in reducing anaemia in women, US$ 12 in economic returns could potentially be produced (2). Anaemia reduction is included as one of six World Health Assembly Global Nutrition Targets within the Comprehensive implementation plan on maternal, infant and young child nutrition. Additionally, anaemia in women 15–49 years of age is one of the targets for the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
WHO has committed to supporting countries to reduce anaemia. At the Nutrition for Growth Summit in 2021, WHO committed to develop a comprehensive framework for action to prevent, diagnose and manage anaemia through a multisectoral approach. WHO, together with UNICEF, is also establishing an Anaemia Action Alliance, bringing partners across sectors together to support implementation of the framework at the country level. References
Related
Fact sheets

========================================
Animal bites
========================================
The health impacts of animal bites vary with the type and health of the animal species, the size and health of the bitten person, and accessibility to appropriate health care. Paediatric cases are of particular concern related to animal bite injuries, with over half of the victims being children. While numerous animal species have the potential to bite humans, incidents involving domestic animals are significantly more prevalent than those involving wildlife, and subsequent infections from wounds can lead to severe illness or even death. In general, the key to better outcomes related to animal bites is timely presentation of the bitten person for appropriate medical attention and accurately identifying the animal attacked. Animals of common concern:
Nearly 5 million people are bitten by snakes worldwide every year, with 94 000–125 000 deaths due to envenomation-related complications, and 400 000 ending up with disabilities. Most of snake bites occur in Africa and South-East Asia, common among people living in rural, resource-poor settings, mainly agricultural workers, women, and children. Prompt medical attention is the key. Main steps of care include: Prevention of snake bites involves informing communities about snake bite risks and prevention techniques including wearing protective shoes/boots; keep storage areas clear of rodents; raise beds above floor level; and tucking mosquito nets securely under sleeping mats. Healthcare providers should be educated on snake-bite management. Public health authorities and policymakers should ensure appropriate supplies of safe and effective antivenoms to communities.
There are no global estimates of dog bite incidence, however studies suggest that dog bites account for tens of millions of injuries annually. In the United States of America for example, approximately 4.5 million people are bitten by dogs every year. Low- and middle-income country data are more fragmented, however some studies reveal that dogs account for 76–94% of animal bite injuries.
Dog bite fatality rates are higher in low- and middle-income countries than in high-income countries because dog-mediated rabies viral infection, and there may be a lack of post-exposure treatment and appropriate access to health care. An estimated 59 000 people die annually from rabies, and bites from rabid dogs account for majority of these deaths. While rabies is vaccine preventable and post-exposure prophylaxis can be administered soon after exposure to save lives, once signs of rabies appear, there is no treatment and the consequences are fatal.
Children are the largest percentage of people bitten by dogs, with the majority in their mid-to-late childhood. The risk of injury to the head and neck is greater in children than in adults, adding to increased severity, necessity for medical treatment and death rates. In some countries, males have a higher frequency of dog bites than females. Dog bites account for over 50% of animal-related injuries in travellers. Provoked bites are often due to attempts to feed or handle animals, whereas unprovoked bites often are associated with infectious stages of rabies. Treatment depends on the location of the bite, the overall health condition of the bitten person and whether the dog is vaccinated against rabies. It is recommended to confine the dog and observe daily for 10 days under the supervision of a veterinarian, and in coordination with local public health authorities. The main principles of care include: Communities – especially children – should be educated about the risks of dog bites and prevention including avoiding stray dogs and never leaving a child unattended around any dog. Health-care providers should be educated on the appropriate management of dog bites. Health authorities and policymakers should ensure rabies control within dog populations, ensure appropriate supplies of rabies vaccines and post exposure treatments for potential rabies exposure in people.
Cat bites: Worldwide, cat bites account for 2–50% of injuries related to animal bites, second to dog bites. In Italy, the incidence of cat-related injuries is 18 per 100 000 population; while in the United States cat bites result in 66 000 emergency departments visits yearly. Cat bites are associated with rabies viral infections and several bacterial infections related to bartonella, brucella, leptospira, and campylobacter species. The likelihood of a cat bite becoming infected is double of that of a dog bite. Monkey bites: Monkey bites account for 2–21% of animal bite injuries. Two studies from India reported monkey bites to be the second common source of bite injuries next to dogs bite injuries. Monkey bites are associated with rabies, simian retroviruses, herpes B virus, and mpox infections, as well as bacterial infections related to salmonella and campylobacter species. Bat bites: Bats are a reservoir for rabies virus worldwide and their bites might not leave recognizable marks making it challenging to determine the risk of exposure. While there are no worldwide estimates on bat bites, bats are the leading cause of rabies deaths in the United States. In Latin America, the risk of bites from hematophagous bats poses the risk of rabies for humans.
Rodent and other wildlife bites: Rats, mice, squirrels, chipmunks and ferrets are commonly associated with bite injuries. Rabies is relatively rare in domestic rodents; however, the bite injuries may lead to bacterial infections of leptospira, salmonella species and hantavirus infections. Bites by raccoons, skunks, and foxes are often associated with rabies exposure in the United States. While injuries to vital organs are to be cautious of, bites by birds are rarely associated with life-threatening infections. Cat bites: Female adults have the highest rate of cat bites. However, similar to dog bites, cat bites are particularly more serious in children with injuries to the face, neck and head. Monkey bites: Monkey bites are an important risk among travellers, after dog bites. Occupational and recreational exposures to monkey bites are related to animal control, veterinary, zoologist, wildlife professions, and hunting or trapping animals.
Bat bites: People are often exposed to bat bites because of occupational or recreational activities that involve regular handling of bats such as animal control and wildlife workers, veterinary staff and zoologists. Travellers to rabies-enzootic areas are also at risk of exposure.
Rodent and other wildlife bites: Owning small rodents as pet animals often lead to bite incidents related to feeding and interacting. Bite injuries by any wildlife to be considered as risky exposures. Treatment depends on the animal species, location and the severity of the bite, epidemiology of rabies in the area, and the rabies vaccination status of animal inflicting the bite. The main principles of care include: Communities and travellers in the rabies enzootic areas should be informed about the risks of animal bites and prevention techniques including vaccinating domestic cats against rabies, avoiding intentional contact with wildlife, and reaching out to animal control or a public health agency for assistance. Health-care providers, health authorities and policymakers should ensure availability of rabies vaccines and controlling infection within animal populations. Stinging or biting insects such as bees, wasps, fire ants, hornets; bites by venomous spiders; as well as scorpion bites can cause a spectrum of health effects ranging from mild discomfort or pain to a potentially lethal reaction in individuals allergic to their venom.
Bites by tropical marine invertebrates such as jellyfish, stingrays and sea urchins can cause mild to life threatening reactions due to envenomation. Individuals who are allergic to the insect venom or immunodeficient are at high risk.
Marine invertebrate exposures are related to recreational activities including beach walking, swimming and surfing. Treatment depends on the animal species, bite location, clinical symptoms and allergic reaction of the bite victim. The main principles of care include: Communities and travellers in the high-risk areas should be informed about the risks of these invertebrate bites and prevention techniques including avoiding intentional contact, wearing protective clothing during outdoor activities. Health-care providers should be educated on the appropriate management of these injuries including the variations of clinical symptoms elicited in individuals with potential to develop allergic reactions to the envenomation. WHO is working to address the public health problem of animal bite injuries. For snake bites: snakebite envenoming fact sheet
For rabies: rabies fact sheet For all other animal-bite injuries, WHO prioritizes data collection initiatives to estimate the burden and risk factors; advocates the strengthening of emergency response; and promotes research initiatives that focus on effective prevention interventions and populations most affected.
References
Buttaravoli P. Marine envenomations. 2007. In Minor Emergencies . Edits by Buttaravoli P, Leffler S, and Herrington RR. Elsevier Health Sciences. ISBN: 9780323662031. https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/medicine-and-dentistry/jellyfish-sting Evgeniou E, Markeson D, Iyer S, Armstrong A. The management of animal bites in the United kingdom. Eplasty. 2013 Jun 10;13:e27. PMID: 23837110; PMCID: PMC3681434.
Hurt, John B. MS, PA-C; Maday, Kristopher R. MS, PA-C. Management and treatment of animal bites. Journal of the American Academy of Physician Assistants 31(4):p 27-31, April 2018. | DOI: 10.1097/01.JAA.0000531049.59137.cd.
Savu AN, Schoenbrunner AR, Politi R, Janis JE. Practical Review of the Management of Animal Bites. Plast Reconstr Surg Glob Open. 2021 Sep 9;9(9):e3778. Doi: 10.1097/GOX.0000000000003778. PMID: 34522565; PMCID: PMC8432645.
Stauffer K, Wallace R, Galland GG, Marano N. 2024. Zoonotic Exposures: Bites, Stings, Scratches, & Other Haards. CDC Yellowbook 2024. Online: https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/yellowbook/2024/environmental-hazards-risks/zoonotic-exposures-bites-stings-scratches-and-other-hazards. Accessed: December 25, 2023)
US Centres of Disease Control and Prevention. Avoid risks of rabies from bats. https://www.cdc.gov/rabies/animals/bats/index.html
Fact sheets

========================================
Antimicrobial resistance
========================================
Antimicrobials – including antibiotics, antivirals, antifungals, and antiparasitics – are medicines used to prevent and treat infectious diseases in humans, animals and plants. Antimicrobial Resistance occurs when bacteria, viruses, fungi and parasites no longer respond to antimicrobial medicines. As a result of drug resistance, antibiotics and other antimicrobial medicines become ineffective and infections become difficult or impossible to treat, increasing the risk of disease spread, severe illness, disability and death.
AMR is a natural process that happens over time through genetic changes in pathogens. Its emergence and spread is accelerated by human activity, mainly the misuse and overuse of antimicrobials to treat, prevent or control infections in humans, animals and plants. Antimicrobial medicines are the cornerstone of modern medicine. The emergence and spread of drug-resistant pathogens threatens our ability to treat common infections and to perform life-saving procedures including cancer chemotherapy and caesarean section, hip replacements, organ transplantation and other surgeries. In addition, drug-resistant infections impact the health of animals and plants, reduce productivity in farms, and threaten food security. AMR has significant costs for both health systems and national economies overall. For example, it creates need for more expensive and intensive care, affects productivity of patients or their caregivers through prolonged hospital stays, and harms agricultural productivity. AMR is a problem for all countries at all income levels. Its spread does not recognize country borders. Contributing factors include lack of access to clean water, sanitation and hygiene for both humans and animals; poor infection and disease prevention and control in homes, healthcare facilities and farms; poor access to quality and affordable vaccines, diagnostics and medicines; lack of awareness and knowledge; and lack of enforcement of relevant legislation. People living in low-resource settings and vulnerable populations are especially impacted by both the drivers and consequences of AMR.
The global rise in antibiotic resistance poses a significant threat, diminishing the efficacy of common antibiotics against widespread bacterial infections. The 2022 Global Antimicrobial Resistance and Use Surveillance System report highlights alarming resistance rates among prevalent bacterial pathogens. Median reported rates in 76 countries of 42% for third-generation cephalosporin-resistant E. coli and 35% for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus are a major concern. For urinary tract infections caused by E. coli, 1 in 5 cases exhibited reduced susceptibility to standard antibiotics like ampicillin, co-trimoxazole, and fluoroquinolones in 2020. This is making it harder to effectively treat common infections.
Klebsiella pneumoniae, a common intestinal bacterium, also showed elevated resistance levels against critical antibiotics. Increased levels of resistance potentially lead to heightened utilization of last-resort drugs like carbapenems, for which resistance is in turn being observed across multiple regions. As the effectiveness of these last-resort drugs is compromised, the risks increase of infections that cannot be treated. Projections by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development indicate an anticipated twofold surge in resistance to last-resort antibiotics by 2035, compared to 2005 levels, underscoring the urgent need for robust antimicrobial stewardship practices and enhanced surveillance coverage worldwide.
As drug-resistant fungal infections increase, WHO is monitoring their magnitude and public health impact. Fungal infections can be difficult to treat, including due to drug-drug interactions for patients with other infections . The emergence and spread of multi-drug resistant Candida auris, an invasive fungal infection, is of particular concern. Development of WHO’s Fungal Priority Pathogens List included a comprehensive review of fungal infections and drug-resistant fungi globally.
HIV drug resistance is caused by changes in the HIV genome that affect the ability of antiretroviral drugs to block the replication of the virus. HIVDR can either be transmitted at the time of infection or acquired because of inadequate adherence to treatment or drug-drug interactions. HIVDR can lead to increased HIV infections and HIV-associated morbidity and mortality. WHO recommends that countries routinely implement HIVDR surveys to inform the selection of optimal ARV drug regimens for HIV prevention and treatment. Tuberculosis (TB) is a major contributor to antimicrobial resistance. Multidrug-resistant tuberculosis is a form of TB caused by bacteria that do not respond to isoniazid and rifampicin, the two most effective first-line TB drugs. MDR-TB is treatable and curable by using second-line drugs, but these medicines are expensive and toxic, and in some cases more extensive drug resistance can develop. TB caused by bacteria that do not respond to the most effective second-line TB drugs can leave patients with very limited treatment options. MDR-TB is therefore a public health crisis and threat to health security. Only about 2 in 5 people with drug resistant TB accessed treatment in 2022.
The emergence of drug-resistant parasites is a major threat to malaria control. Artemisinin-based combination therapies are the recommended first-line treatment for uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria and are used by most malaria endemic countries. Emergence of partial resistance to artemisinin and/or partner drugs in ACTs makes selecting the right treatment more challenging and requires close monitoring. In the Greater Mekong Subregion, partial resistance to artemisinin or a partner drug has been confirmed in several countries since 2001. In the WHO Eastern Mediterranean Region, resistance to a partner drug, sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine, led in some countries to treatment failure requiring a change to another ACT. In Africa, mutations linked to artemisinin partial resistance have been observed in several countries. ACTs that have been tested remain efficacious, but further spread of resistance could be a major public health challenge and improved surveillance is vital. The emergence of drug resistance against medicines for neglected tropical diseases is a significant threat to programmes to control, eliminate and eradicate NTDs, which especially affect vulnerable and marginalized populations. Resistance has been reported in leprosy medicines in several countries, in several anti-helminthics (while resistance has so far only been observed in use in animals, which is a serious concern for the veterinary sector, some of these medicines are also used in humans), in medicines used to treat human African trypanosomiasis and leishmaniasis , and others. It is important to monitor resistance and drug efficacy, put in place strategies to delay or curb resistance, and strengthen the pipeline of second-line medicines for NTDs. For example, WHO provides guidance for surveillance of resistance for the global leprosy elimination programme, and support to control distribution and monitor the standardized use, safety and efficacy of medicines, including donated medicines, in NTD programmes.
AMR is a complex problem that requires both sector-specific actions in the human health, food production, animal and environmental sectors, and a coordinated approach across these sectors. One Health refers to an integrated, unifying approach that aims to achieve optimal and sustainable health outcomes for people, animals and ecosystems. It recognizes that the health of humans, domestic and wild animals, plants and the wider environment are closely linked and inter-dependent. The One Health approach to preventing and controlling AMR brings together stakeholders from relevant sectors to communicate and work together in the design, implementation and monitoring of programmes, policies, legislation and research to mitigate AMR and attain better health and economic outcomes. To address AMR globally, countries adopted the Global Action Plan on AMR during the 2015 World Health Assembly and committed to the development and implementation of multisectoral national action plans with a One Health approach to tackle AMR. The GAP was subsequently endorsed by the Governing Bodies of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the World Organisation for Animal Health and the United Nations Environment Program.
To coordinate the One Health global response to AMR, WHO works closely with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations , the UN Environment Programme and the World Organisation for Animal Health . The 4 organizations are known as the Quadripartite. A quadripartite joint secretariat is hosted by WHO to drive multi-stakeholder engagement in AMR. This has supported establishment of the Global Leaders Group on AMR, which began its work in November 2020, and the Multi-Stakeholder Partnership Platform, which was launched in November 2022, and several technical working groups.
In March 2022, United Nations General Assembly resolution A/RES/76/257 established a second High-level Meeting on AMR to be held in 2024, in collaboration with the Quadripartite Organizations and with the support of the Global Leaders Group. In October 2023, The President of the General Assembly appointed the Permanent Representatives of Barbados and Malta to co-facilitate the high-level meeting. The high-level meeting is an important opportunity for countries to make ambitious commitments and agree targets, and the Quadripartite Joint Secretariat is working closely with the co-facilitators and Global Leaders Group to ensure optimal participation and inputs from the human, animal, agri-food and the environment sectors.
In addition, three Global High-level Ministerial Conferences on AMR, in the Netherlands in 2014 and 2019, and in Oman in 2022, led to the Global Action Plan, the AMR Multi-Partner Trust Fund, and groundbreaking multisectoral AMR targets. A fourth high-level ministerial conference will be hosted by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in 2024.
World AMR Awareness Week is a global campaign to raise awareness, understanding and best practices with the public, One Health stakeholders, and other policymakers. One of WHO’s official health campaigns since 2015, WAAW is celebrated from 18 to 24 November every year. As of November 2023, 178 countries had developed AMR national action plans aligned with the GAP. To ensure sustained progress, countries need to establish a functioning multisectoral AMR governance mechanism, prioritize activities, develop a costed operational plan, mobilize resources , and effectively implement their plan. Monitoring mechanisms are needed to track progress, identify challenges and report periodically. To globally track the progress in AMR national action plan implementation, countries have committed to completing the multisectoral annual Tracking AMR Country Self-Assessment Survey that was launched in 2016 with results published at https://www.amrcountryprogress.org/.
To address AMR in a programmatic manner that puts people, their needs and equitable access to health services at the centre of the AMR response in the community, in primary care, secondary and tertiary care, and at national and/or subnational level, WHO has developed the People-centred approach to addressing antimicrobial resistance in human health and WHO core package of interventions to support national action plans. This focuses on preventing infections and ensuring universal access to health services for quality diagnosis and appropriate treatment. As a crucial part of their AMR response, countries can integrate the core package of AMR interventions in national plans and strategies for universal health coverage and health emergency preparedness and response.
Antimicrobial stewardship is a systematic approach to educate and support health care professionals to follow evidence-based guidelines for prescribing and administering antimicrobials. The education of the health workforce is of crucial importance, as they form the front line in safeguarding the effectiveness of antimicrobial medicines. WHO guides countries to develop and implement Antimicrobial Stewardship Programmes as one of the most cost-effective interventions to optimize the use of antimicrobial medicines, improve patient outcomes and reduce AMR and health care-associated infections.
To improve access to appropriate treatment and reduce inappropriate use of antibiotics, WHO developed the AWaRe classification of antibiotics. The WHO AWaRe antibiotic book provides concise, evidence-based guidance on the choice of antibiotic, dose, route of administration, and duration of treatment for more than 30 of the most common clinical infections in children and adults in both primary health care and hospital settings.
WHO launched the Global Antimicrobial Resistance and Use Surveillance System in 2015 to fill knowledge gaps and inform strategies at all levels. GLASS progressively incorporates data from surveillance of AMR in humans, surveillance of the use and consumption of antimicrobials, and integrated AMR data in the One Health sectors including the food chain and in the environment. GLASS provides a standardized approach to the collection, analysis, interpretation and sharing of data by countries, territories and areas. It also monitors the status of existing and new national surveillance systems, with emphasis on representativeness and quality of data collection. Some WHO regions have established surveillance networks that provide technical support to countries and facilitate enrollment into GLASS. WHO is committed especially to supporting low- and middle-income countries to improve data collection and usage for policymaking, both through GLASS and by supporting nationally representative AMR prevalence surveys. The clinical pipeline of new antimicrobials is almost dry and there is a pipeline and access crisis for antibiotics. WHO’s latest annual review of the pre-clinical and clinical antibacterial pipelines identified 27 antibiotics in clinical development that address WHO bacterial priority pathogens, of which only 6 were classified as innovative. In addition, a lack of access to quality antimicrobials and shortages of generic off-patent antibiotics affect countries across all levels of income and development.
To guide research and development into new antimicrobials, diagnostics and vaccines, and inform public health action, WHO developed the first WHO bacterial priority pathogens list in 2017 and updated this in 2023 , and published the WHO fungal priority pathogen list in 2022.
To help fill the major gaps in R&D for antimicrobials, vaccines and diagnostic tools, WHO works closely with organizations such as the Global Antibiotic Research & Development Partnership , the AMR Action Fund, and the Combating Antibiotic Resistant Bacteria Biopharmaceutical Accelerator . Various governments are also piloting different models to incentivize research and development of newer antimicrobials to ultimately ensure access to treatment. Greater innovation and investment are also required in epidemiological and operational research. WHO has outlined 40 priority research topics for AMR in human health and, with the Quadripartite organizations, a One Health priority research agenda for AMR.
References
1. Antimicrobial Resistance Collaborators. . Global burden of bacterial antimicrobial resistance in 2019: a systematic analysis. The Lancet; 399 : P629-655. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(21)02724-0
2. Drug-Resistant Infections: A Threat to Our Economic future https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/health/publication/drug-resistant-infections-a-threat-to-our-economic-future
Related
News
Feature stories
Commentaries
More
World Antimicrobial Awareness Week
World Antimicrobial Awareness Week

========================================
Anxiety disorders
========================================
Everyone can feel anxious sometimes, but people with anxiety disorders often experience fear and worry that is both intense and excessive. These feelings are typically accompanied by physical tension and other behavioural and cognitive symptoms. They are difficult to control, cause significant distress and can last a long time if untreated. Anxiety disorders interfere with daily activities and can impair a person’s family, social and school or working life.
An estimated 4% of the global population currently experience an anxiety disorder (1). In 2019, 301 million people in the world had an anxiety disorder, making anxiety disorders the most common of all mental disorders (1). Although highly effective treatments for anxiety disorders exist, only about 1 in 4 people in need receive any treatment (2). Barriers to care include lack of awareness that this is a treatable health condition, lack of investment in mental health services, lack of trained health care providers, and social stigma.
People with an anxiety disorder may experience excessive fear or worry about a specific situation or, in the case of generalized anxiety disorder, about a broad range of everyday situations. They typically experience these symptoms over an extended period – at least several months. Usually they avoid the situations that make them anxious. Other symptoms of anxiety disorders may include:
Anxiety disorders increase the risk for depression and substance use disorders as well as the risk of suicidal thoughts and behaviours.
There are several different kinds of anxiety disorders, including: People may experience more than one anxiety disorder at the same time. Symptoms often begin during childhood or adolescence and continue into adulthood. Girls and women are more likely to experience an anxiety disorder than boys and men.
Anxiety disorders, like other mental health conditions, result from a complex interaction of social, psychological and biological factors. Anyone can have an anxiety disorder, but people who have lived through abuse, severe losses or other adverse experiences are more likely to develop one. Anxiety disorders are closely related to and affected by physical health. Many of the impacts of anxiety are also known risk factors for diseases such as cardiovascular disease. In turn, people with these diseases may also find themselves experiencing anxiety disorders due to the difficulties associated with managing their conditions.
Effective community based approaches to prevent anxiety include parental education and school-based programmes to enhance social and emotional learning and build positive coping in children and adolescents. Exercise programmes can also be effective in preventing anxiety disorders in adults. There are several effective treatments for anxiety disorders. People with symptoms of anxiety should seek care. Psychological interventions are essential treatments for anxiety disorders and refer primarily to talk therapy with professionals or supervised lay therapists. These interventions can help people learn new ways of thinking, coping or relating to their anxiety, to others or to the world. They can teach people how to face the situations, events, people or places that trigger their anxiety. Psychological interventions can be provided to individuals or groups, in person or online. They may also be accessed through self-help manuals, websites and apps. The psychological interventions with the most evidence for treating a range of anxiety disorders are those based on principles of cognitive-behavioural therapy. These include exposure therapy, during which people learn to face their fears.
In addition, learning stress management skills, such as relaxation skills and mindfulness skills, can help reduce symptoms of anxiety disorders. Antidepressant medications, such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors , can also be useful in treating adults with anxiety disorders. Health-care providers should keep in mind the possible adverse effects associated with antidepressant medication, the ability to deliver either intervention , and individual preferences. Benzodiazepines, which have historically been prescribed for anxiety disorders, are generally not recommended for anxiety disorders because of their high potential for dependence as well as their limited long-term effectiveness.
Self-care can play an important role in supporting treatment. To help manage your symptoms of anxiety and promote your overall well-being, you can:
WHO’s Comprehensive mental health action plan 2013–2030 highlights the steps required to provide appropriate interventions for people with mental health conditions, including anxiety disorders. Generalized anxiety disorder and panic disorder are included in the priority conditions covered by WHO’s mhGAP Programme. This programme aims to help countries increase services for people with mental, neurological and substance use disorders through care provided by health workers who are not specialists in mental health. WHO has developed brief psychological intervention manuals that may be delivered by lay therapists to individuals and groups. These interventions have been shown to be effective for multiple mental health problems, including anxiety and depression. An example is the Problem management plus manual, which is based on principles of cognitive behavioural therapy and uses techniques like stress management, problem solving treatment and strengthening social support. Additionally, the Self-Help Plus group-based stress management course and WHO’s popular Doing What Matters in Times of Stress self-help book describe skills that can be used to reduce anxiety and stress. Related Comprehensive mental health action plan 2013–2030Mental Health Gap Action Programme More on mental health Fact sheets

========================================
Arsenic
========================================
Arsenic is a natural component of the earth’s crust and is widely distributed throughout the environment in the air, water and land. It is highly toxic in its inorganic form.
People are exposed to elevated levels of inorganic arsenic through drinking contaminated water, using contaminated water in food preparation and irrigation of food crops, industrial processes, eating contaminated food and smoking tobacco.
Long-term exposure to inorganic arsenic, mainly through drinking-water and food, can lead to chronic arsenic poisoning. Skin lesions and skin cancer are the most characteristic effects.
Drinking-water and food
The greatest threat to public health from arsenic originates from contaminated groundwater. Inorganic arsenic is naturally present at high levels in the groundwater of a number of countries, including Argentina, Bangladesh, Cambodia, Chile, China, India, Mexico, Pakistan, the United States of America and Viet Nam. Drinking-water, crops irrigated with contaminated water and food prepared with contaminated water are the sources of exposure.
Fish, shellfish, meat, poultry, dairy products and cereals can also be dietary sources of arsenic, although exposure from these foods is generally much lower compared to exposure through contaminated groundwater. In seafood, arsenic is mainly found in its less toxic organic form.
Industrial processes
Arsenic is used industrially as an alloying agent, as well as in the processing of glass, pigments, textiles, paper, metal adhesives, wood preservatives and ammunition. Arsenic is also used in the hide tanning process and, to a limited extent, in pesticides, feed additives and pharmaceuticals.
Tobacco
People who smoke tobacco can also be exposed to the natural inorganic arsenic content of tobacco because tobacco plants can take up arsenic naturally present in the soil. The potential for elevated arsenic exposure was much greater in the past when tobacco plants were treated with lead arsenate insecticide.
Inorganic arsenic is a confirmed carcinogen and is the most significant chemical contaminant in drinking-water globally. Arsenic can also occur in an organic form. Inorganic arsenic compounds are highly toxic while organic arsenic compounds are less harmful to health.
Acute effects
The immediate symptoms of acute arsenic poisoning include vomiting, abdominal pain and diarrhoea. These are followed by numbness and tingling of the extremities, muscle cramping and death, in extreme cases.
Long-term effects
The first symptoms of long-term exposure to high levels of inorganic arsenic are usually observed in the skin, and include pigmentation changes, skin lesions and hard patches on the palms and soles of the feet . These occur after a minimum exposure of approximately five years and may be a precursor to skin cancer.
In addition to skin cancer, long-term exposure to arsenic may also cause cancers of the bladder and lungs. The International Agency for Research on Cancer has classified arsenic and arsenic compounds as carcinogenic to humans and has also stated that arsenic in drinking-water is carcinogenic to humans.
Other adverse health effects that may be associated with long-term ingestion of inorganic arsenic include developmental effects, diabetes, pulmonary disease and cardiovascular disease. Arsenic-induced myocardial infarction in particular can be a significant cause of excess mortality. Arsenic is also associated with adverse pregnancy outcomes and infant mortality, with impacts on child health (1), and exposure in utero and in early childhood has been linked to increases in mortality in young adults due to multiple cancers, lung disease, heart attacks and kidney failure (2). Numerous studies have demonstrated negative impacts of arsenic exposure on cognitive development, intelligence and memory (3).
Arsenic contamination of groundwater is widespread and there are a number of regions where arsenic contamination of drinking-water is significant. An estimated 140 million people in at least 70 countries have been drinking water containing arsenic at levels above the WHO provisional guideline value of 10 μg/L . This is consistent with recent statistical modelling which suggests between 94 and 220 million people are at risk of exposure to elevated arsenic concentrations in groundwater (6).
The symptoms and signs caused by long-term elevated exposure to inorganic arsenic differ between individuals, population groups and geographical areas. Thus, there is no universal definition of the disease caused by arsenic. This complicates the assessment of the burden on health of arsenic.
Similarly, there is no method to distinguish cases of cancer caused by arsenic from cancers induced by other factors. As a result, there is no reliable estimate of the magnitude of the problem worldwide.
In 2010, the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives re-evaluated the effects of arsenic on human health, taking new data into account. JECFA concluded that for certain regions of the world where concentrations of inorganic arsenic in drinking-water exceed 50–100 μg/L, there is some evidence of adverse effects. In other areas, where arsenic concentrations in water are elevated , JECFA concluded that while there is a possibility of adverse effects. These would be at a low incidence that would be difficult to detect in epidemiological studies.
The most important action in affected communities is the prevention of further exposure to arsenic by the provision of a safe water supply for drinking, food preparation and irrigation of food crops. There are a number of options to reduce levels of arsenic in drinking-water.
Long-term actions are also required to reduce occupational exposure from industrial processes.
Education and community engagement are key factors for ensuring successful interventions. There is a need for community members to understand the risks of high arsenic exposure and the sources of arsenic exposure, including the intake of arsenic by crops from irrigation water and the intake of arsenic into food from cooking water.
High-risk populations should also be monitored for early signs of arsenic poisoning – usually skin problems.
Arsenic is one of WHO’s 10 chemicals of major public health concern. WHO’s work to reduce arsenic exposure includes setting guideline values, reviewing evidence and providing risk management recommendations. WHO publishes a guideline value for arsenic in its Guidelines for drinking-water quality. The Guidelines are intended for use as the basis for regulation and standard setting worldwide.
The current recommended limit of arsenic in drinking-water is 10 μg/L, although this guideline value is designated as provisional because of practical difficulties in removing arsenic from drinking-water. Every effort should therefore be made to keep concentrations as low as reasonably possible and below the guideline value when resources are available.
However, millions of people around the world are exposed to arsenic at concentrations much higher than the guideline value , and therefore the public health priority should be to reduce exposure for these people. Where it is difficult to achieve the guideline value, Member States may set higher limits or interim values as part of an overall strategy to progressively reduce risks, while taking into account local circumstances, available resources, and risks from low arsenic sources that are contaminated microbiologically.
The WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene monitors progress towards global targets on drinking water. Under the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the indicator of "safely managed drinking water services" calls for tracking the population accessing drinking water which is free of faecal contamination and priority chemical contaminants, including arsenic.
--
References
(1) Association of arsenic with adverse pregnancy outcomes/infant mortality: a systematic review and meta-analysis.Quansah R, Armah FA, Essumang DK, Luginaah I, Clarke E, Marfoh K, et al. Environ Health Perspect. 2015;123(5):412-21.
(2) In utero and early life arsenic exposure in relation to long-term health and disease.Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. Farzan SF, Karagas MR, Chen Y. 2013;272(2):384-90.
(3) The developmental neurotoxicity of arsenic: cognitive and behavioral consequences of early life exposure.Tolins M, Ruchirawat M, Landrigan P. Ann Glob Health. 2014;80(4):303-14.
(4) Arsenic Pollution: A Global Synthesis.Ravenscroft P, Brammer H, Richards K. Wiley-Blackwell; 2009.
(5) Arsenic primer: Guidance on the investigation and mitigation of arsenic contamination. New York: United Nations Children’s Fund and the World Health Organization; 2018. (6) Global threat of arsenic in groundwater. Podgorski J, Berg M. Science. 2020;368 :845-850.
Related
Fact sheets

========================================
Asbestos
========================================
Asbestos is a group of mineral fibres with widespread current and historical commercial uses, but which can cause deaths and serious ill-health in workers and other people who are exposed to these fibres .
All forms of asbestos have been assessed by WHO as causing several types of cancer, and asbestos also causes chronic respiratory diseases. Because of its use in building materials, anyone engaging in construction, maintenance and demolition of buildings where asbestos has been used is potentially at risk, even many years or decades after the asbestos was put in place.
Asbestos-related diseases can be prevented, and the most efficient way to prevent them is to stop the use of all forms of asbestos to prevent exposure, as more than 50 WHO Member States have already done through legal measures, and to use low hazard materials instead. Preventing asbestos exposure also means protecting workers during maintenance work where asbestos is already in place, and during asbestos removal.
Asbestos is a group of naturally occurring mineral fibres. It has widespread current or historical commercial uses because of its material properties . There are six main forms of asbestos, and the main form in current use is chrysotile .
All six main forms of asbestos have been assessed by WHO as being carcinogenic to humans. Exposure to asbestos, including chrysotile, causes cancer of the lung, larynx and ovaries, and mesothelioma . There is also clear scientific evidence that asbestos causes chronic respiratory diseases such as asbestosis , and other adverse effects on the lungs.
Due to the widespread uses of asbestos, and therefore high numbers of people potentially exposed to this material, asbestos has been estimated to cause deaths and ill health in large numbers of people every year.
According to WHO and the International Labour Organization , exposure to asbestos at work causes more than 200 000 deaths globally every year . This represents over 70% of deaths from work-related cancers. In addition to this estimate of mortality, exposure to asbestos is also estimated to cause a substantial burden of ill health . A substantial level of deaths and ill health are also attributed to exposure to asbestos outside the workplace. It has also been shown that co-exposure to tobacco smoke and asbestos fibres substantially increases the risk for lung cancer – and the heavier the smoking, the greater the risk.
A systematic review from the WHO/ILO Joint Estimates reported that studies to date suggest that a substantial proportion of manual workers in the construction industry globally are exposed to asbestos (1), however the available evidence was judged to be of “low quality of evidence” and further studies are needed on this. There is also exposure during the mining and processing of asbestos, and in the production and use of asbestos-containing products including brake shoes, brake pads and clutches for vehicles, and in particular building materials such as roof tiles made with asbestos cement. Anyone trimming or fitting asbestos-containing products is potentially at risk.
Exposure to asbestos fibres also occurs where asbestos-containing products have become degraded, such as during building maintenance and demolition and the disposal of building waste. Damage to buildings because of natural disasters is a particular concern if asbestos-containing building materials have been used. Anyone engaging in construction, maintenance and demolition of buildings where asbestos has been used is potentially at risk, even many years or decades after the asbestos was put in place.
Asbestos-related diseases can be prevented, and the most efficient way to prevent them is to stop the use of all forms of asbestos to prevent exposure. More than 50 WHO Member States have legislated to prohibit the use of asbestos. Decisions to take legislative action have considered a range of costs and benefits, including the costs of providing healthcare and the loss of workforce productivity, in addition to conventional economic and trade considerations. Preventing asbestos exposure also means protecting workers during maintenance work where asbestos is in place, and during asbestos removal.
Because of earlier widespread use in buildings in many countries, workers will need to be protected from exposure during building maintenance or asbestos removal for many years to come. Due to the long period which exists between exposure and the development of asbestos-related diseases , deaths and ill-health caused by asbestos will continue for many years after a country has banned all uses of this material, and for various reasons some countries are still using asbestos. Awareness-raising efforts, disease surveillance and training of medical staff, labour inspectors and occupational health professionals will need to be maintained over the long term.
Several alternatives and substitutes for the uses of asbestos have been identified, and human health evaluations of substitute materials have been published. Many fibre substitutes for chrysotile asbestos assessed by WHO pose a relatively low hazard to human health, though the carcinogenic hazard of some fibre substitutes was found to be high. However, there are many non-fibre low hazard materials that can substitute for chrysotile asbestos in various uses, such as conventional building materials.
The World Health Assembly Resolution 58.22 on cancer prevention urges Member States to pay special attention to cancers for which avoidable exposure is a factor, including exposure to chemicals at the workplace and in the environment. Eliminating asbestos-related diseases is particularly targeted at countries still using chrysotile asbestos, in addition to assistance in relation to exposures arising from historical use of all forms of asbestos. WHO, in collaboration with the International Labour Organization and other intergovernmental organizations and civil society, works with countries towards elimination of asbestos-related diseases by:
References
Related
WHO/ILO Joint Estimates of the Work-related Burden of Disease and Injury, 2000-2016: Global Monitoring Report
Chrysotile asbestosOutline for the development of national programmes for elimination of asbestos-related diseases
IARC Monograph Programme – A review of human carcinogens – Part C: metals, arsenic, dusts, and fibres
Elimination of asbestos-related diseases
Global gaps in the translational science of disease prevention
WHO's work on chemical safety
News
Facts in pictures
Feature stories
Events
Commentaries
Documents

========================================
assistive-technology
========================================
Assistive technology is an umbrella term for assistive products and their related systems and services.
Assistive products help maintain or improve an individual’s functioning related to cognition, communication, hearing, mobility, self-care and vision, thus enabling their health, well-being, inclusion and participation.
Improving access to assistive technology can contribute to the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals and to ensuring that no one is left behind. This is through enabling the inclusion and participation of assistive technology users in their family, community and all areas of society, including the political, economic and social spheres.
Most people will need assistive technology at some point in their lives, especially as they age. While some may require assistive technology temporarily, such as after an accident or illness, others may require it for a longer period or throughout their lifespan. Assistive technology is most needed by:
Assistive technology can help people in all aspects of their lives, including in education, employment, fitness, leisure and other everyday activities such as self-care, cooking and reading. Assistive technology can positively impact a person, their family and friends, and has broader socioeconomic benefits. For example:
The WHO and UNICEF Global report on assistive technology demonstrates considerable inequity in access to assistive technology. As few as 3% of people in some low-income countries were reported to have access to the assistive products they need, in comparison to 90% in some high-income countries. Examples of the unmet global need for specific assistive technology include:
Barriers impacting access to assistive technology include low awareness, high costs, limited physical access, inadequate product range, procurement challenges, workforce capacity gaps, inadequate policy, insufficient funding, assistive technology sector fragmentation and sociodemographic obstacles.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development places good health and well-being at the centre of a new development vision. It emphasizes universal health coverage to ensure sustainable development for all so that everyone can access the health services needed without financial hardship. Addressing the unmet need for assistive products is crucial for achieving Sustainable Development Goals, providing UHC, and implementing the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
‘Leaving no one behind’ means ensuring people with disabilities, the older population, those affected by chronic diseases and everyone who needs assistive technology are included in society and able to live healthy and dignified lives.
The WHO and UNICEF Global report on assistive technology offers recommendations specifically intended to steer governments and other stakeholders towards achieving universal access to assistive technology. These 10 priority recommendations underline the ongoing efforts required to enhance access to assistive technology for all in need.
WHO is taking measures to address the global disparity in access to assistive technology, developing normative guidance and providing technical support to Member States to support them in implementing the 2018 World Health Assembly Resolution on Improving Access to Assistive Technology . WHO uses the WHO-GATE 5P framework as a strategy for strengthening access to assistive technology in any context. This strategy places people at the centre and focuses equal attention on policy, products, provision and personnel as interconnected elements that must be aligned to ensure equitable access. WHO and UNICEF published the Global Report on Assistive Technology in 2022, which provides the most comprehensive global evidence on assistive technology. WHO has developed a range of guidance, tools and resources in collaboration with other partners to support countries to strengthen their assistive technology provision systems. WHO is also the Secretariat for the Global Cooperation on Assistive Technology Initiative, which brings together diverse stakeholders who share the vision of a world where assistive technology is universally accessible to everyone, everywhere.
Related
News
Fact sheets
Feature stories

========================================
asthma
========================================
OverviewAsthma is a chronic lung disease affecting people of all ages. It is caused by inflammation and muscle tightening around the airways, which makes it harder to breathe. Symptoms can include coughing, wheezing, shortness of breath and chest tightness. These symptoms can be mild or severe and can come and go over time. Although asthma can be a serious condition, it can be managed with the right treatment. People with symptoms of asthma should speak to a health professional.ImpactAsthma is often under-diagnosed and under-treated, particularly in low- and middle-income countries.People with under-treated asthma can suffer sleep disturbance, tiredness during the day, and poor concentration. Asthma sufferers and their families may miss school and work, with financial impact on the family and wider community. If symptoms are severe, people with asthma may need to receive emergency health care and they may be admitted to hospital for treatment and monitoring. In the most severe cases, asthma can lead to death.SymptomsSymptoms of asthma can vary from person to person. Symptoms sometimes get significantly worse. This is known as an asthma attack. Symptoms are often worse at night or during exercise.Common symptoms of asthma include:a persistent cough, especially at nightwheezing when exhaling and sometimes when inhalingshortness of breath or difficulty breathing, sometimes even when restingchest tightness, making it difficult to breathe deeply.Some people will have worse symptoms when they have a cold or during changes in the weather. Other triggers can include dust, smoke, fumes, grass and tree pollen, animal fur and feathers, strong soaps and perfume.Symptoms can be caused by other conditions as well. People with symptoms should talk to a healthcare provider.CausesMany factors have been linked to an increased risk of developing asthma, although it is often difficult to find a single, direct cause.Asthma is more likely if other family members also have asthma – particularly a close relative, such as a parent or sibling.Asthma is more likely in people who have other allergic conditions, such as eczema and rhinitis .Urbanization is associated with increased asthma prevalence, probably due to multiple lifestyle factors. Events in early life affect the developing lungs and can increase the risk of asthma. These include low birth weight, prematurity, exposure to tobacco smoke and other sources of air pollution, as well as viral respiratory infections. Exposure to a range of environmental allergens and irritants are also thought to increase the risk of asthma, including indoor and outdoor air pollution, house dust mites, moulds, and occupational exposure to chemicals, fumes or dust.Children and adults who are overweight or obese are at a greater risk of asthma.TreatmentAsthma cannot be cured but there are several treatments available. The most common treatment is to use an inhaler, which delivers medication directly to the lungs. Inhalers can help control the disease and enable people with asthma to enjoy a normal, active life. There are two main types of inhaler: bronchodilators , that open the air passages and relieve symptoms; andsteroids that reduce inflammation in the air passages, which improves asthma symptoms and reduces the risk of severe asthma attacks and death. People with asthma may need to use their inhaler every day. Their treatment will depend on the frequency of symptoms and the types of inhalers available.Using an inhaler can be difficult, especially for children and during emergency situations. Using a spacer device makes it easier to use an aerosol inhaler. This helps the medicine to reach the lungs more easily. A spacer is a plastic container with a mouthpiece or mask at one end and a hole for the inhaler in the other. A homemade spacer, made from a 500ml plastic bottle, can be as effective as commercially manufactured spacers. Access to inhalers is a problem in many countries. In 2021, bronchodilators were available in public primary health care facilities in half of low- and low-middle income countries, and steroid inhalers available in one third. It is also important to raise community awareness to reduce the myths and stigma associated with asthma in some settings.Self-carePeople with asthma and their families need education to understand more about their asthma. This includes their treatment options, triggers to avoid, and how to manage their symptoms at home. It is important for people with asthma to know how to increase their treatment when their symptoms are worsening to avoid a serious attack. Healthcare providers may give an asthma action plan to help people with asthma to take greater control of their treatment. WHO response Asthma is included in the WHO Global Action Plan for the Prevention and Control of NCDs and the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.WHO is taking action to extend diagnosis of and treatment for asthma in a number of ways.The WHO Package of Essential Noncommunicable Disease Interventions was developed to help improve NCD management in primary health care in low-resource settings. PEN includes protocols for the assessment, diagnosis and management of chronic respiratory diseases , and modules on healthy lifestyle counselling, including tobacco cessation and self-care. Reducing tobacco smoke exposure is important for both primary prevention of asthma and disease management. The Framework Convention on Tobacco Control is enabling progress in this area as are WHO initiatives such as MPOWER and mTobacco Cessation.Air pollution is an important risk factor for asthma, causing new cases and making existing disease worse. WHO has developed training for health care workers on air pollution which highlights this link and offers practical advice to reduce and mitigate exposure. The Global Alliance against Chronic Respiratory Diseases contributes to WHO’s work to prevent and control chronic respiratory diseases. GARD is a voluntary alliance of national and international organizations and agencies from many countries committed to the vision of a world where all people breathe freely. References1. Global burden of 369 diseases and injuries in 204 countries and territories, 1990–2019: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019. Lancet. 2020;396 :1204-22 Asthma is a chronic lung disease affecting people of all ages. It is caused by inflammation and muscle tightening around the airways, which makes it harder to breathe. Symptoms can include coughing, wheezing, shortness of breath and chest tightness. These symptoms can be mild or severe and can come and go over time. Although asthma can be a serious condition, it can be managed with the right treatment. People with symptoms of asthma should speak to a health professional.
Asthma is often under-diagnosed and under-treated, particularly in low- and middle-income countries.
People with under-treated asthma can suffer sleep disturbance, tiredness during the day, and poor concentration. Asthma sufferers and their families may miss school and work, with financial impact on the family and wider community. If symptoms are severe, people with asthma may need to receive emergency health care and they may be admitted to hospital for treatment and monitoring. In the most severe cases, asthma can lead to death.
Symptoms of asthma can vary from person to person. Symptoms sometimes get significantly worse. This is known as an asthma attack. Symptoms are often worse at night or during exercise.
Common symptoms of asthma include:
Some people will have worse symptoms when they have a cold or during changes in the weather. Other triggers can include dust, smoke, fumes, grass and tree pollen, animal fur and feathers, strong soaps and perfume.
Symptoms can be caused by other conditions as well. People with symptoms should talk to a healthcare provider.
Many factors have been linked to an increased risk of developing asthma, although it is often difficult to find a single, direct cause.
Asthma cannot be cured but there are several treatments available. The most common treatment is to use an inhaler, which delivers medication directly to the lungs. Inhalers can help control the disease and enable people with asthma to enjoy a normal, active life. There are two main types of inhaler: People with asthma may need to use their inhaler every day. Their treatment will depend on the frequency of symptoms and the types of inhalers available.
Using an inhaler can be difficult, especially for children and during emergency situations. Using a spacer device makes it easier to use an aerosol inhaler. This helps the medicine to reach the lungs more easily. A spacer is a plastic container with a mouthpiece or mask at one end and a hole for the inhaler in the other. A homemade spacer, made from a 500ml plastic bottle, can be as effective as commercially manufactured spacers. Access to inhalers is a problem in many countries. In 2021, bronchodilators were available in public primary health care facilities in half of low- and low-middle income countries, and steroid inhalers available in one third. It is also important to raise community awareness to reduce the myths and stigma associated with asthma in some settings.
People with asthma and their families need education to understand more about their asthma. This includes their treatment options, triggers to avoid, and how to manage their symptoms at home. It is important for people with asthma to know how to increase their treatment when their symptoms are worsening to avoid a serious attack. Healthcare providers may give an asthma action plan to help people with asthma to take greater control of their treatment. Asthma is included in the WHO Global Action Plan for the Prevention and Control of NCDs and the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
WHO is taking action to extend diagnosis of and treatment for asthma in a number of ways.
The WHO Package of Essential Noncommunicable Disease Interventions was developed to help improve NCD management in primary health care in low-resource settings. PEN includes protocols for the assessment, diagnosis and management of chronic respiratory diseases , and modules on healthy lifestyle counselling, including tobacco cessation and self-care. Reducing tobacco smoke exposure is important for both primary prevention of asthma and disease management. The Framework Convention on Tobacco Control is enabling progress in this area as are WHO initiatives such as MPOWER and mTobacco Cessation.
Air pollution is an important risk factor for asthma, causing new cases and making existing disease worse. WHO has developed training for health care workers on air pollution which highlights this link and offers practical advice to reduce and mitigate exposure. References
1. Global burden of 369 diseases and injuries in 204 countries and territories, 1990–2019: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019. Lancet. 2020;396 :1204-22
Related
Global health estimates 2019
NCD country capacity survey
Global action plan for the prevention and control of noncommunicable diseases 2013–2020
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
WHO package of essential noncommunicable disease interventions for primary health care
WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control
MPOWER
Be Healthy, Be Mobile: A handbook on how to implement mTobaccoCessation
Global Alliance against Chronic Respiratory Diseases WHO's work on chronic respiratory diseases
Chronic respiratory diseases programme
Fact sheets
Feature stories

========================================
autism
========================================
Autism spectrum disorders are a diverse group of conditions. They are characterized by some degree of difficulty with social interaction and communication. Other characteristics are atypical patterns of activities and behaviours, such as difficulty with transition from one activity to another, a focus on details and unusual reactions to sensations.
The abilities and needs of autistic people vary and can evolve over time. While some people with autism can live independently, others have severe disabilities and require life-long care and support. Autism often has an impact on education and employment opportunities. In addition, the demands on families providing care and support can be significant. Societal attitudes and the level of support provided by local and national authorities are important factors determining the quality of life of people with autism.
Characteristics of autism may be detected in early childhood, but autism is often not diagnosed until much later.
People with autism often have co-occurring conditions, including epilepsy, depression, anxiety and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder as well as challenging behaviours such as difficulty sleeping and self-injury. The level of intellectual functioning among autistic people varies widely, extending from profound impairment to superior levels.
Epidemiology
It is estimated that worldwide about 1 in 100 children has autism (1). This estimate represents an average figure, and reported prevalence varies substantially across studies. Some well-controlled studies have, however, reported figures that are substantially higher. The prevalence of autism in many low- and middle-income countries is unknown.
Available scientific evidence suggests that there are probably many factors that make a child more likely to have autism, including environmental and genetic factors.
Extensive research using a variety of different methods and conducted over many years has demonstrated that the measles, mumps and rubella vaccine does not cause autism. Studies that were interpreted as indicating any such link were flawed, and some of the authors had undeclared biases that influenced what they reported about their research .
Evidence also shows that other childhood vaccines do not increase the risk of autism. Extensive research into the preservative thiomersal and the additive aluminium that are contained in some inactivated vaccines strongly concluded that these constituents in childhood vaccines do not increase the risk of autism.
Assessment and care
A broad range of interventions, from early childhood and across the life span, can optimize the development, health, well-being and quality of life of autistic people. Timely access to early evidence-based psychosocial interventions can improve the ability of autistic children to communicate effectively and interact socially. The monitoring of child development as part of routine maternal and child health care is recommended.
It is important that, once autism has been diagnosed, children, adolescents and adults with autism and their carers are offered relevant information, services, referrals, and practical support, in accordance with their individual and evolving needs and preferences.
The health-care needs of people with autism are complex and require a range of integrated services, that include health promotion, care and rehabilitation. Collaboration between the health sector and other sectors, particularly education, employment and social care, is important.
Interventions for people with autism and other developmental disabilities need to be designed and delivered with the participation of people living with these conditions. Care needs to be accompanied by actions at community and societal levels for greater accessibility, inclusivity and support.
Human rights
All people, including people with autism, have the right to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health.
And yet, autistic people are often subject to stigma and discrimination, including unjust deprivation of health care, education and opportunities to engage and participate in their communities.
People with autism have the same health problems as the general population. However, they may, in addition, have specific health-care needs related to autism or other co-occurring conditions. They may be more vulnerable to developing chronic noncommunicable conditions because of behavioural risk factors such as physical inactivity and poor dietary preferences, and are at greater risk of violence, injury and abuse.
People with autism require accessible health services for general health-care needs like the rest of the population, including promotive and preventive services and treatment of acute and chronic illness. Nevertheless, autistic people have higher rates of unmet health-care needs compared with the general population. They are also more vulnerable during humanitarian emergencies. A common barrier is created by health-care providers’ inadequate knowledge and understanding of autism.
WHO resolution on autism spectrum disorders In May 2014, the Sixty-seventh World Health Assembly adopted a resolution entitled Comprehensive and coordinated efforts for the management of autism spectrum disorders, which was supported by more than 60 countries.
The resolution urges WHO to collaborate with Member States and partner agencies to strengthen national capacities to address ASD and other developmental disabilities.
WHO response
WHO and partners recognize the need to strengthen countries' abilities to promote the optimal health and well-being of all people with autism.WHO's efforts focus on:
WHO Comprehensive mental health action plan 2013–2030 and World Health Assembly Resolution WHA73.10 for “global actions on epilepsy and other neurological disorders” calls on countries to address the current significant gaps in early detection, care, treatment and rehabilitation for mental and neurodevelopmental conditions, which include autism. It also calls for counties to address the social, economic, educational and inclusion needs of people living with mental and neurological disorders, and their families, and to improve surveillance and relevant research.
1. Global prevalence of autism: A systematic review update. Zeidan J et al. Autism Research 2022 March.
2. Wakefield's affair: 12 years of uncertainty whereas no link between autism and MMR vaccine has been proved. Maisonneuve H, Floret D. Presse Med. 2012 Sep; French . 3. Lancet retracts Wakefield’s MMR paper. Dyer C. BMJ 2010;340:c696. 2 February 2010 4. Kmietowicz Z. Wakefield is struck off for the “serious and wide-ranging findings against him” BMJ 2010; 340 :c2803 doi:10.1136/bmj.c2803 Related
Training for caregivers of children with development delays and disabilities
News
Fact sheets
Feature stories

========================================
bacterial-vaginosis
========================================
Key factsBacterial vaginosis (BV) is a very common cause of vaginal discharge among women of reproductive age.It is treatable and curable. BV prevalence varies across countries and population groups, but a recent systematic review and meta-analysis of the global BV prevalence among women of reproductive age range from 23–29%.BV increases the risk of acquiring HIV, acquisition of and transmission of other STIs and if left untreated can lead to adverse effects of pregnancy.OverviewBacterial vaginosis (BV) is a very common condition in women. Although it occurs globally, it is more common in low-resource settings and areas with limited access to healthcare.The exact cause of BV is not known. While many “good” bacteria are normally found in the healthy vagina, BV results from an imbalance between “good” and “harmful” bacteria micro-organisms. More specifically, an overgrowth of pathogens such as Gardnerella spp., Prevotella spp., Mobilincus spp., Megaspahera spp., Sneathea spp. and mixed vaginal anaerobes species would eventually replace the “beneficial” lactobacilli that helps maintain a healthy vaginal environment. The exact cause of this imbalance is not known but has been attributed to douching and having unprotected sex with a new or several sex partners. Signs and symptomsSome women with BV may not notice any symptoms whereas others might express:unusual discharge from the vaginaa strong fishy or musty odour from the vaginaitching or irritation around the vaginaburning during urination.BV is a very common condition and does not usually cause serious complications. However, if untreated it could lead to:problems in pregnancy higher risk of sexually transmitted infections, including HIV pelvic inflammatory disease.Vaginal cleansing and douching can increase the risk of developing BV. Intravaginal practice, e.g. insertion of herbs or other products into the vagina, is another risk factor.DiagnosisHealthcare providers will discuss the patient’s medical and sexual history and conduct a genital examination to check for the presence of vaginal discharge. The most commonly used diagnostic test for BV is wet mount microscopy or Gram stain of vaginal fluid smear, possibly combined with vaginal pH measurement and sniff test in the Amsel criteria. Clinical and laboratory assessments for bacterial vaginosis can be affected by factors such as recent sexual activity, menstrual cycle, douching, intravaginal practice and use of antimicrobial agents.In settings where laboratory diagnosis is not possible, a syndromic approach for case management to diagnose and treat vaginal discharge is recommended. TreatmentBV is treatable and curable. It is best treated with the antibiotic metronidazole but efficacy of treatments for BV is low if not combined with lifestyle/risk reduction advice. Further instructions on avoiding excessive vaginal cleansing or douching and intravaginal practice should be provided. Other treatments include:metronidazole gel tinidazole clindamycin clindamycin secnidazole.Women who present with vaginal discharge, and who are managed based on the syndromic approach are treated for BV, candidiasis and trichomoniasis. Metronidazole is indicated for both BV and trichomonas, while topical or oral antifungals are indicated for candidiasis.WHO responseWHO works with partners and Member States to reduce the burden of bacterial vaginosis globally. This work includes developing research and evidence to better understand the epidemiology, burden and impact of BV, particularly in low- and middle-income countries. In 2021, the Department of Global HIV, Hepatitis and STIs Programmes at WHO published Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections to provide updated, evidence-informed clinical and practical recommendations on case management of people with STIs. In 2024, WHO published Recommendations for the treatment of Trichomonas vaginalis, Mycoplasma genitalium, Candida albicans, bacterial vaginosis and human papillomavirus ‎ to provide evidence-informed clinical and practical recommendations on case management of BV.
Although it occurs globally, it is more common in low-resource settings and areas with limited access to healthcare.
The exact cause of BV is not known. While many “good” bacteria are normally found in the healthy vagina, BV results from an imbalance between “good” and “harmful” bacteria micro-organisms. More specifically, an overgrowth of pathogens such as Gardnerella spp., Prevotella spp., Mobilincus spp., Megaspahera spp., Sneathea spp. and mixed vaginal anaerobes species would eventually replace the “beneficial” lactobacilli that helps maintain a healthy vaginal environment. The exact cause of this imbalance is not known but has been attributed to douching and having unprotected sex with a new or several sex partners. Some women with BV may not notice any symptoms whereas others might express:
BV is a very common condition and does not usually cause serious complications. However, if untreated it could lead to:
Vaginal cleansing and douching can increase the risk of developing BV. Intravaginal practice, e.g. insertion of herbs or other products into the vagina, is another risk factor.
Healthcare providers will discuss the patient’s medical and sexual history and conduct a genital examination to check for the presence of vaginal discharge. The most commonly used diagnostic test for BV is wet mount microscopy or Gram stain of vaginal fluid smear, possibly combined with vaginal pH measurement and sniff test in the Amsel criteria. Clinical and laboratory assessments for bacterial vaginosis can be affected by factors such as recent sexual activity, menstrual cycle, douching, intravaginal practice and use of antimicrobial agents.
In settings where laboratory diagnosis is not possible, a syndromic approach for case management to diagnose and treat vaginal discharge is recommended. BV is treatable and curable. It is best treated with the antibiotic metronidazole but efficacy of treatments for BV is low if not combined with lifestyle/risk reduction advice. Further instructions on avoiding excessive vaginal cleansing or douching and intravaginal practice should be provided. Other treatments include:
Women who present with vaginal discharge, and who are managed based on the syndromic approach are treated for BV, candidiasis and trichomoniasis. Metronidazole is indicated for both BV and trichomonas, while topical or oral antifungals are indicated for candidiasis.
In 2021, the Department of Global HIV, Hepatitis and STIs Programmes at WHO published Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections to provide updated, evidence-informed clinical and practical recommendations on case management of people with STIs. In 2024, WHO published Recommendations for the treatment of Trichomonas vaginalis, Mycoplasma genitalium, Candida albicans, bacterial vaginosis and human papillomavirus ‎ to provide evidence-informed clinical and practical recommendations on case management of BV.
Related
WHO's work on sexually transmitted infections
News
Fact sheets
More
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infectionsBacterial vaginosis: comparison of vaginal metronidazole with vaginal clindamycin in the treatment of bacterial vaginosisTrichomoniasis and bacterial vaginosis in pregnancy: inadequately managed with the syndromic approach

========================================
biodiversity
========================================
Biodiversity, the variability among living organisms from all sources, underpins all life on Earth. This includes diversity within species, between species and across ecosystems, representing the genetic makeup of plants, animals, microorganisms and the complexity of ecosystems. Healthy communities are sustained by well-functioning ecosystems, which provide critical services such as clean air, fresh water, natural medicines and food security. These ecosystems also regulate diseases and help stabilize the climate. For example, forests absorb over 2.6 billion tonnes of CO2 annually, contributing to climate regulation and reducing the incidence of diseases linked to pollution. However, biodiversity loss is accelerating at an unprecedented rate, with approximately 1 million species at risk of extinction, threatening these vital services and exacerbating public health risks globally. People depend on biodiversity in many ways. Human health relies on ecosystem resources, products and services (such as fresh water, food and fuel sources; the regulation of crop pests and diseases; and the regulation of air, water and soil quality) which are needed for good health and productive livelihoods. Biodiversity loss can have significant direct health impacts if ecosystem services no longer meet societal needs. Changes in ecosystems can affect livelihoods, income, local migration and may even cause or increase political conflict.
Significant medical and pharmacological discoveries are made through greater understanding of the Earth's biodiversity. Biological diversity of microorganisms, flora and fauna provides extensive benefits for biological, health, and pharmacological sciences. It is also the source of traditional and complementary medicines.
Biodiversity loss also has profound economic consequences, particularly in sectors like agriculture, fisheries and healthcare. It is estimated that the global economic impact of biodiversity loss amounts to US$ 10 trillion annually, including healthcare costs from increased disease transmission and agricultural losses from pollinator declines. For example, the decline in bee populations, which are responsible for pollinating crops worth over US$ 235 billion annually, threatens global food security and nutrition.
Biodiversity loss is occurring at an alarming rate, with recent estimates showing that species extinctions are currently 10 to 100 times higher than the natural baseline. This is largely due to human activities like deforestation, habitat fragmentation, and climate change. This loss threatens essential ecosystem services, including pollination, soil fertility, and water purification, with direct consequences for human health. For example, the degradation of wetlands, which filter freshwater, has led to a 35% decline in global wetland coverage since 1970, increasing waterborne diseases and reducing water availability for over 2 billion people.
Biodiversity loss and ecosystem degradation are becoming major health concerns. When ecosystems are disrupted, services like clean air, water, and food can be affected. Additionally, we lose valuable natural resources – like plants and animals – that may hold untapped benefits for health and medicine.
Biodiversity serves as the foundation of healthy sustainable food systems. It directly influences the availability and nutritional value of food, as a diverse range of plant and animal species, ecosystems, and genetic resources contributes to healthier, more resilient food production. Access to enough nutritious and varied food is a fundamental determinant of health.
Nutrition and biodiversity are interconnected at various levels, from ecosystems that provide food to the genetic diversity within species. This diversity affects the nutritional composition of food, including micronutrient availability. Healthy diets with adequate nutrient intake depend on high biodiversity.
Biodiversity offers a genetic pool for developing resilient and sustainable food crops, livestock and marine species. It plays a crucial role in breeding varieties resistant to pests, diseases and climate extremes. Utilizing this genetic potential enhances agricultural productivity and resilience, reducing dependence on chemical inputs and promoting sustainable practices. This not only improves food quality but also supports community health and well-being.
Biodiversity supports key ecosystem services like soil fertility, natural pest control, pollination and water regulation. Preserving biodiversity in agricultural landscapes promotes sustainable food systems capable of producing nutritious food with minimal environmental impact.
However, intensified food production practices affects global nutrition and health. Biodiversity degradation occurs through activities such as excessive use of irrigation, fertilizers and pesticides. Habitat simplification and species loss increases vulnerabilities, highlighting the need for biodiversity-friendly practices to support food security and public health.
Traditional medicine continues to play a crucial role in healthcare, particularly in primary healthcare settings. It is estimated that 60% of the world's population utilizes traditional medicines. Among the various modalities of traditional medicine, the use of medicinal plants stands out as the most prevalent worldwide. Medicinal plants are obtained through wild collection and cultivation, providing communities and Indigenous Peoples with natural products that serve medicinal, cultural and even nutritional purposes.
Human activities disrupt biodiversity and ecosystems, affecting their structure and functions. Deforestation, land-use change, habitat loss and fragmentation, population growth, climate change, pollution, invasive alien species, migration, trade and other drivers all play a role in disease patterns. These disturbances alter organism abundance, population dynamics and ecological interactions, ultimately impacting infectious diseases. Increased contact between wildlife, livestock and people lead to increased risk of disease transmission. Biodiversity plays a crucial role in disease regulation by maintaining balanced ecosystems where no single species dominates. This balance helps limit the spread of zoonotic diseases . Recent studies estimate that over 75% of emerging infectious diseases, such as Ebola or Nipah virus, are zoonotic and often arise in areas where ecosystems and habitats have been disrupted by deforestation or land-use change. By maintaining biodiversity, ecosystems can buffer humans from risks of exposure to disease reservoirs.
Climate is an integral part of ecosystem functioning and human health is impacted directly and indirectly by climatic condition changes in terrestrial, aquatic and marine ecosystems.
Biodiversity is influenced by climate variability and change, and extreme weather events that directly influence ecosystem health, productivity and availability of ecosystem goods and services for human use. Marine biodiversity is affected by ocean acidification related to levels of carbon in the atmosphere. Longer term changes in climate affect the viability and health of ecosystems, influencing shifts in the distribution of plants, pathogens, animals and even human settlements. In addressing these challenges, there is growing recognition of the potential of ecosystem-based approaches, also known as nature-based solutions, to mitigate and adapt to the impacts of climate change on biodiversity and human health.
Ecosystems such as forests and wetlands act as natural carbon sinks, absorbing CO2 and regulating global temperatures. The destruction of these ecosystems accelerates climate change, leading to increased heatwaves, floods, and other climate-related health risks, including heat-stress, malnutrition, and the spread of vector-borne diseases like malaria and dengue.
WHO develops biodiversity-informed public health plans, global evidence summaries on biodiversity and health, assists countries in assessing health vulnerabilities from biodiversity loss and monitors biodiversity-informed health policies to ensure human rights, equity, and Health for All are upheld.
The WHO Global Centre for Traditional Medicine supports traditional knowledge systems within a rights-based framework that promotes sustainable health practices.
WHO advocates for strengthening health systems to be climate- and biodiversity-resilient by integrating biodiversity into public health policies through approaches like One Health, addressing infectious and noncommunicable diseases, food safety, security, and Antimicrobial Resistance , through a whole-of-government, whole-of-society approach based on equity.
WHO fosters cross-sectoral collaboration by providing training, guidance, and support for biodiversity-informed health policies. The Expert Working Group on Biodiversity, Climate Change, One Health, and Nature-based Solutions develops evidence-based strategies addressing biodiversity loss and its health impacts. Further collaboration is achieved with the Nature for Health initiative, which tackles biodiversity loss and climate change to prevent pandemic risks at their source, by promoting policies and capacity development aligned with the Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework.
Related
News
Fact sheets
Feature stories
Documents

========================================
bipolar-disorder
========================================
In 2019, approximately 1 in 150 adults were living with bipolar disorder (1). The condition is primarily observed among working-age people, but also in youth. While the prevalence of bipolar disorder among men and women is approximately equal, available data indicate that women are more often diagnosed. Worldwide, the treatment coverage for people with bipolar disorder is low. Both men and women are often misdiagnosed. Many lack access to services and recommended interventions, especially in low- and middle-income countries .
Stigma and discrimination against people with bipolar disorder are widespread, both in communities and health services. This can undermine access to health care. It also fuels social exclusion and can limit opportunities for education, employment and housing.
Bipolar disorder is one of the leading causes of disability globally as it can affect many areas of life. People with bipolar disorder may experience strained relationships, problems at school or work, and difficulties in carrying out daily activities. Having bipolar disorder also increases the risk of suicide and of developing anxiety and substance use disorders.
People with bipolar disorder are more likely to smoke, use alcohol, have a physical health condition , and experience difficulties in accessing health care. On average, people with bipolar disorder die more than 10 years earlier than the general population (2). Bipolar disorder is a mental health condition characterized by mood swings from one extreme to another.
During a manic episode, a person experiences an extremely high mood with lots of energy . They may have a sense of euphoria, sudden shifts in mood or an excess of emotion . In manic episodes, the changes in mood and activities are accompanied by other characteristic symptoms, which may include:
On the contrary, during a depressive episode, a person experiences a depressed mood . They may feel a loss of interest or pleasure in activities that they had previously enjoyed. Other symptoms are also present, which may include: A depressive episode is different from mood fluctuations commonly experienced by most people, in that the symptoms last most of the day, nearly every day, for at least two weeks.
Both manic and depressive episodes can cause significant difficulties in all aspects of life, including at home, work and school. They may require specialized care to prevent the person from doing harm to themselves or others. Some people with bipolar disorder may experience what are called hypomanic episodes. Hypomanic episodes involve similar symptoms to manic episodes, but the symptoms are less intense and do not typically disrupt the person’s ability to function to the same extent. There are two main types of bipolar disorder, depending on patterns of manic or hypomanic and depressive episodes. The exact cause of bipolar disorder is unknown. Several factors – including biological , psychological, social and structural factors – may contribute to its onset, trajectory and outcomes. Adverse circumstances or life-altering events can trigger or exacerbate the symptoms of bipolar disorder. These may include bereavement, violence or the breakdown of a relationship. The use of alcohol or drugs can also influence the onset and trajectory of bipolar disorder.
Although employment can be a source of stress for people living with bipolar disorder, it can also be protective. Under good working conditions, and when supported at their workplace with reasonable adjustments, employment can promote recovery by improving functioning, reducing symptoms and leading to a higher quality of life and improved self-esteem.
Even though symptoms often recur, recovery is possible. With appropriate care, people with bipolar disorder can cope with their symptoms and live meaningful and productive lives.
There are a range of effective treatment options, typically a mix of medicines and psychological and psychosocial interventions. Medicines are considered essential for treatment, but themselves are usually insufficient to achieve full recovery. People with bipolar disorder should be treated with respect and dignity and should be meaningfully involved in care choices, including through shared decision-making regarding treatment and care, balancing effectiveness, side-effects and individual preferences. People with bipolar disorder need treatment and care across acute episodes of mania and depression and when indicated, longer-term treatment to prevent relapse. Mood stabilizers and antipsychotics are proven to help manage acute mania. Lithium prescription requires clinical and laboratory monitoring. Girls and women who are pregnant, breastfeeding or have childbearing potential should not use valproate. Lithium and carbamazepine also need to be avoided during pregnancy and breastfeeding whenever possible. Antidepressants should not be taken during a manic episode and they may be combined with mood stabilizers or antipsychotics during episodes of depression. Some medicines for bipolar disorder can make people feel sleepy, have involuntary muscle spasms or tremors, or experience metabolic changes . These side effects can affect adherence to treatment and should be monitored and managed. Adults with bipolar disorder who are in complete remission usually need to continue with mood stabilizers or antipsychotic medicines for at least six months. Those experiencing multiple episodes of mania and depression will usually require longer-term treatment to minimize relapses.
People with bipolar disorder can benefit from lifestyle changes involving regular sleep, physical activity, a healthy diet, reduction of stressors, and mood monitoring. Psychological interventions can effectively reduce depressive symptoms and the possibility of them coming back. Family psychoeducation can also help families understand and support their loved one better. Support from family and friends is very important. Support groups – where people can receive encouragement, learn coping skills, and share experiences – can be helpful to people with bipolar disorder and their families.
Recovery-oriented psychosocial interventions include supported employment, supported housing, peer support, and social and life skills training. They serve to promote hope and to support the autonomy, personal empowerment and social inclusion of people with bipolar disorder. Medicines and psychological or psychosocial interventions should be tailored to the needs of the person and combined for best outcomes. The Comprehensive Mental Health Action Plan 2013-2030 highlights the steps needed to provide appropriate services for people with mental health conditions, including bipolar disorder. The WHO Special Initiative for Mental Health aims to further progress towards the plan’s objectives by ensuring 100 million more people can access quality and affordable care for mental health conditions.
WHO's Mental Health Gap Action Programme , which is being implemented in more than 100 countries, provides evidence-based technical guidance, tools and training packages to build capacities and expand treatment coverage for a set of priority conditions, including bipolar disorder, in non-specialized settings in LMICs. WHO’s guidelines on Management of physical health conditions in adults with severe mental disorders provide evidence-based recommendations to practitioners on how to recognize and manage comorbid physical and mental health conditions, including bipolar disorder.
WHO’s QualityRights initiative aims to improve the quality of care and human rights standards in mental health and social care facilities and to empower organizations to advocate for the health of people with mental health conditions, including bipolar disorder. The Guidance on community mental health services and person-centred and rights-based approaches describes what person-centred and human rights-based approaches look like in mental health, and give examples of good practice services.
References
Related
Fact sheets

========================================
blindness-and-visual-impairment
========================================
Vision, the most dominant of our senses, plays a critical role in every facet and stage of our lives. We take vision for granted, but without vision, we struggle to learn, to walk, to read, to participate in school and to work. Vision impairment occurs when an eye condition affects the visual system and its vision functions. Everyone, if they live long enough, will experience at least one eye condition in their lifetime that will require appropriate care.
Vision impairment has serious consequences for the individual across the life course. Many of these consequences can be mitigated by timely access to quality eye care. Eye conditions that can cause vision impairment and blindness – such as cataract or refractive error – are, for good reasons, the main focus of eye care strategies; nevertheless, the importance of eye conditions that do not typically cause vision impairment – such as dry eye or conjunctivitis – must not be overlooked. These conditions are frequently among the leading reasons for presentation to eye care services.
Globally, the leading causes of vision impairment and blindness are:
There is substantial variation in the causes of vision impairment between and within countries according to the availability of eye care services, their affordability, and the education of the population. For example, the proportion of vision impairment attributable to unoperated cataract is higher in low- and middle-income countries. In high income countries, diseases such as glaucoma and age-related macular degeneration are more common.
Among children, congenital cataract is a leading cause of vision impairment in low-income countries, whereas in middle-income countries it is more likely to be retinopathy of prematurity.
Uncorrected refractive error remains a leading cause of vision impairment in all countries amongst children and adult populations.
Globally, at least 2.2 billion people have a near or distance vision impairment. In at least 1 billion – or almost half – of these cases, vision impairment could have been prevented or has yet to be addressed.
Among this 1 billion people, the main conditions causing distance vision impairment or blindness are cataract , refractive error , age-related macular degeneration , glaucoma , diabetic retinopathy (1). The main condition causing near vision impairment is presbyopia (2).
In terms of regional differences, the prevalence of distance vision impairment in low- and middle-income regions is estimated to be 4 times higher than in high-income regions (1). With regards to near vision, rates of unaddressed near vision impairment are estimated to be greater than 80% in western, eastern and central sub-Saharan Africa, while comparative rates in high-income regions of North America, Australasia, western Europe, and of Asia-Pacific are reported to be lower than 10% (2).
Population growth and ageing are expected to increase the risk that more people acquire vision impairment.
Young children with early onset irreversible severe vision impairment can experience delayed motor, language, emotional, social and cognitive development, with lifelong consequences. School-age children with vision impairment can also experience lower levels of educational achievement.
Vision impairment severely impacts quality of life among adult populations. Adults with vision impairment can experience lower rates of employment and higher rates of depression and anxiety.
In the case of older adults, vision impairment can contribute to social isolation, difficulty walking, a higher risk of falls and fractures, and a greater likelihood of early entry into nursing or care homes.
Vision impairment poses an enormous global financial burden with an estimate annual global productivity loss of about US$ 411 billion purchasing power parity (3). This figure far outweighs the estimated cost gap of addressing the unmet need of vision impairment .
There are effective interventions covering promotion, prevention, treatment and rehabilitation which address the needs associated with eye conditions and vision impairment. While many vision loss cases can be prevented (such as those due to infections, trauma, unsafe traditional medicines, perinatal diseases, nutrition-related diseases, unsafe use or self-administration of topical treatment), this is not possible for all. For many eye conditions, e.g. diabetic retinopathy, early detection and timely treatment are crucial to avoid irreversible vision loss. Spectacle correction for refractive error and surgery for cataract are among the most cost-effective of all health-care interventions. Yet, globally only 36% of people with a distance vision impairment due to refractive error have received access to an appropriate pair of spectacles and only 17% of people with vision impairment or blindness due to cataract have received access to quality surgery.
Treatment is also available for many eye conditions that do not typically cause vision impairment, such as dry eye, conjunctivitis and blepharitis, but generate discomfort and pain. Treatment of these conditions is directed at alleviating the symptoms and preventing the evolution towards more severe stages of those diseases.
Vision rehabilitation is very effective in improving functioning for people with an irreversible vision loss that can be caused by eye conditions such as diabetic retinopathy, glaucoma, consequences of trauma, and age-related macular degeneration.
WHO’s work is guided by the recommendations of the WHO World report on vision and the resolution on "integrated, people-centred eye care, including preventable blindness and vision impairment" adopted at the Seventy-third World Health Assembly in 2020. The key proposal is to make integrated people-centred eye care the care model of choice and to ensure its widespread implementation. It is expected that by shaping the global agenda on vision and eye care, the report and resolution will assist Member States and their partners in their efforts to reduce the burden of eye conditions and vision.
Some of WHO’s key areas of work and activities in the prevention of blindness include:
References
1. GBD 2019 Blindness and Vision Impairment Collaborators; Vision Loss Expert Group of the Global Burden of Disease Study. Causes of blindness and vision impairment in 2020 and trends over 30 years, and prevalence of avoidable blindness in relation to VISION 2020: the Right to Sight: an analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study. Lancet Glob Health. 2021 Feb;9(2):e144-e160. doi: 10.1016/S2214-109X(20)30489-7.
2. Fricke, TR, Tahhan N, Resnikoff S, Papas E, Burnett A, Suit MH, Naduvilath T, Naidoo K, Global Prevalence of Presbyopia and Vision Impairment from Uncorrected Presbyopia: Systematic Review, Meta-analysis, and Modelling, Ophthalmology. 2018 May 9.
3. Burton MJ, Ramke J, Marques AP, Bourne RR, Congdon N, Jones I, et al. The Lancet Global Health commission on Global Eye Health: vision beyond 2020. Lancet Glob Health. 2021; 9(4):e489–e551.
Related
Health topic page
Related links
News
Fact sheets

========================================
blood-safety-and-availability
========================================
Blood transfusion saves lives and improves health, but many patients requiring transfusion do not have timely access to safe blood. Providing safe and adequate blood should be an integral part of every country’s national health care policy and infrastructure.
WHO recommends that all activities related to blood collection, testing, processing, storage and distribution be coordinated at the national level through effective organization and integrated blood supply networks. The national blood system should be governed by national blood policy and legislative framework to promote uniform implementation of standards and consistency in the quality and safety of blood and blood products.
In 2018, 73 % of reporting countries, or 125 out of 171, had a national blood policy. Overall, 66% of reporting countries, or 113 out of 171, have specific legislation covering the safety and quality of blood transfusion, including:
About 118.54 million blood donations are collected worldwide. 40% of these are collected in high-income countries, home to 16 % of the world’s population.
About 13 300 blood centres in 169 countries report collecting a total of 106 million donations. Collections at blood centres vary according to income group. The median annual donations per blood centre is 1 300 in the low-income countries, 4 400 in lower-middle-income countries and 9 300 in upper-middle-income countries, as compared to 25 700 in high-income countries.
There is a marked difference in the level of access to blood between low- and high-income countries. The whole blood donation rate is an indicator for the general availability of blood in a country. The median blood donation rate in high-income countries is 31.5 donations per 1000 people. This compares with 16.4 donations per 1000 people in upper-middle-income countries, 6.6 donations per 1000 people in lower-middle-income countries, and 5.0 donations per 1000 people in low-income countries.
60 countries report collecting fewer than 10 donations per 1000 people. Of these, 34 countries are in the WHO African Region, four in the WHO Region of the Americas, four in the WHO Eastern Mediterranean region, four in the WHO European Region, five in the WHO South-Eastern Asia Region, and nine in the WHO Western Pacific Region. All are low- or middle-income countries.
Data about the gender profile of blood donors show that globally 33% of blood donations are given by women, although this ranges widely. In 15 of the 113 reporting countries, less than 10% of donations are given by female donors.
The age profile of blood donors shows that, proportionally, more young people donate blood in low- and middle-income countries than in high-income countries. Demographic information of blood donors is important for formulating and monitoring recruitment strategies.
There are 3 types of blood donors:
An adequate and reliable supply of safe blood can be assured by a stable base of regular, voluntary, unpaid blood donors. These donors are also the safest group of donors as the prevalence of bloodborne infections is lowest among this group. World Health Assembly resolution WHA63.12 urges all Member States to develop national blood systems based on voluntary unpaid donations and to work towards the goal of self-sufficiency.
Data reported to WHO shows significant increases of voluntary unpaid blood donations in low- and middle-income countries:
WHO recommends that all blood donations should be screened for infections prior to use. Screening for HIV, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, and syphilis should be mandatory. Blood screening should be performed according to quality system requirements. Of reporting countries, 10 are not able to screen all donated blood for one or more of the above infections.
99.8% of the donations in high-income countries and 99.9% in upper-middle-income countries are screened following basic quality procedures, as compared to 83% in lower-middle-income countries and 76 % in low-income countries. The prevalence of transfusion-transmissible infections in blood donations in high-income countries is considerably lower than in low- and middle-income countries .
These differences reflect the variation in prevalence among population who are eligible to donate blood, the type of donors and the effectiveness of the system of educating and selecting donors.
Blood collected in an anticoagulant can be stored and transfused to a patient in an unmodified state. This is known as ‘whole blood’ transfusion. However, blood can be used more effectively if it is processed into components, such as red cell concentrates, platelet concentrates, plasma and cryoprecipitate. In this way, it can meet the needs of more than one patient.
The capacity to provide patients with the different blood components they require is still limited in low-income countries: 38% of the blood collected in low-income countries is separated into components, 75% in lower-middle-income countries, 96% in upper-middle-income countries, and 96% in high-income countries.
World Health Assembly resolution WHA63.12 urges Member States to establish, implement and support nationally coordinated, efficiently managed and sustainable blood and plasma programmes, according to the availability of resources, with the aim of achieving self-sufficiency. It is the responsibility of individual governments to ensure sufficient and equitable supply of plasma-derived medicinal products, namely immunoglobulins and coagulation factors, which are needed to prevent and treat a variety of serious conditions that occur worldwide.
Only 56 of 171 reporting countries produce plasma-derived medicinal products through the fractionation of plasma collected in the reporting country. A total of 91 countries reported that all PDMP are imported, 16 countries reported that no PDMP were used during the reporting period, and 8 countries did not respond to the question.
Around 19 million litres of plasma from 45 reporting countries was fractionated for the production of PDMP during the year. This includes around 31% of plasma recovered from the whole blood donations. The volume of plasma for fractionation per 1000 population varied considerably between the reporting countries, ranging from 0.1 to 52.6 litres, with a median of 5.2 litres.
Unnecessary transfusions and unsafe transfusion practices expose patients to the risk of serious adverse transfusion reactions and transfusion-transmissible infections. Unnecessary transfusions also reduce the availability of blood products for patients who are in need.
WHO recommends the development of systems, such as hospital transfusion committees and haemovigilance, to monitor and improve the safety of transfusion processes. In this regard:
There are great variations between countries in terms of age distribution of transfused patients. For example, in high-income countries, the most frequently transfused patient group is over 60 years of age, which accounts for up to 76% of all transfusions. In low-income countries, up to 54% of transfusions are for children under the age of 5 years.
In high-income countries, transfusion is most commonly used for supportive care in cardiovascular surgery, transplant surgery, massive trauma, and therapy for solid and haematological malignancies. In low- and middle-income countries it is used more often to manage pregnancy-related complications and severe childhood anaemia.
The risk of transmission of serious infections, including HIV and hepatitis, through unsafe blood and chronic blood shortages brought global attention to the importance of blood safety and availability. With the goal of ensuring universal access to safe blood and blood products, WHO has been at the forefront to improve blood safety and availability, and recommends the following integrated strategy for blood safety and availability:
WHO supports countries in developing national blood systems to ensure timely access to safe and sufficient supplies of blood and blood products and good transfusion practices to meet patient needs. WHO provides policy guidance and technical assistance to countries for ensuring universal access to safe blood and blood products and work towards self-sufficiency in safe blood and blood products based on voluntary unpaid blood donation to achieve universal health coverage.
*Data source: This fact sheet is based on data obtained through the WHO Global Database on Blood Safety from 108 countries for the year 2018. To give a more complete overview of the global situation, data for the year 2017 have been used for 40 countries and data for the year 2015 have been used for 23 countries, where current data are not available. Overall, responses received from 171 countries cover 97.5 % of the world’s population.
Related
World Blood Donor Day
More about blood safety
More
PublicationsTowards 100% voluntary blood donationBlood donor selectionProtecting the blood supply during infectious disease outbreaks: guidance for national blood servicesA guide to establishing a national haemovigilance systemGuidance on increasing supplies of plasma-derived medicinal products in low- and middle-income countries through fractionation of domestic plasma

========================================
botulism
========================================
Foodborne botulism is a serious, potentially fatal disease. However, it is relatively rare. It is an intoxication usually caused by ingestion of potent neurotoxins, the botulinum toxins, formed in contaminated foods. Person to person transmission of botulism does not occur.
Spores produced by the bacteria Clostridium botulinum are heat-resistant and exist widely in the environment, and in the absence of oxygen they germinate, grow and then excrete toxins. There are 7 distinct forms of botulinum toxin, types A–G. Four of these cause human botulism. Types C, D and E cause illness in other mammals, birds and fish.
Botulinum toxins are ingested through improperly processed food in which the bacteria or the spores survive, then grow and produce the toxins. Though mainly a foodborne intoxication, human botulism can also be caused by intestinal infection with C. botulinum in infants, wound infections, and by inhalation.
Botulinum toxins are neurotoxic and therefore affect the nervous system. Foodborne botulism is characterized by descending, flaccid paralysis that can cause respiratory failure. Early symptoms include marked fatigue, weakness and vertigo, usually followed by blurred vision, dry mouth and difficulty in swallowing and speaking. Vomiting, diarrhoea, constipation and abdominal swelling may also occur. The disease can progress to weakness in the neck and arms, after which the respiratory muscles and muscles of the lower body are affected. There is no fever and no loss of consciousness.
The symptoms are not caused by the bacterium itself, but by the toxin produced by the bacterium. Symptoms usually appear within 12 to 36 hours after exposure. Incidence of botulism is low, but the mortality rate is high if prompt diagnosis and appropriate, immediate treatment are not given. The disease can be fatal in 5 to 10% of cases.
C. botulinum is an anaerobic bacterium, meaning it can only grow in the absence of oxygen. Foodborne botulism occurs when C. botulinum grows and produces toxins in food prior to consumption. C. botulinum produces spores and they exist widely in the environment including soil, river and sea water.
The growth of the bacteria and the formation of toxin occur in products with low oxygen content and certain combinations of storage temperature and preservative parameters. This happens most often in lightly preserved foods and in inadequately processed, home-canned or home-bottled foods.
C. botulinum will not grow in acidic conditions , and therefore the toxin will not be formed in acidic foods . Combinations of low storage temperature and salt contents and/or pH are also used to prevent the growth of the bacteria or the formation of the toxin.
The botulinum toxin has been found in a variety of foods, including low-acid preserved vegetables, such as green beans, spinach, mushrooms, and beets; fish, including canned tuna, fermented, salted and smoked fish; and meat products, such as ham and sausage. The food implicated differs between countries and reflects local eating habits and food preservation procedures. Occasionally, commercially prepared foods are involved.
Though spores of C. botulinum are heat-resistant, the toxin produced by bacteria growing out of the spores under anaerobic conditions is destroyed by boiling . Therefore, ready-to-eat foods in low oxygen-packaging are more frequently involved in cases of foodborne botulism.
Food samples associated with suspect cases must be obtained immediately, stored in properly sealed containers, and sent to laboratories in order to identify the cause and to prevent further cases.
Infant botulism occurs mostly in infants under 6 months of age. Different from foodborne botulism caused by ingestion of pre-formed toxins in food, it occurs when infants ingest C. botulinum spores, which germinate into bacteria that colonize in the gut and release toxins. In most adults and children older than about 6 months, this would not happen because natural defences in intestines that develop over time prevent germination and growth of the bacterium.
C. botulinum in infants include constipation, loss of appetite, weakness, an altered cry and a striking loss of head control. Although there are several possible sources of infection for infant botulism, spore-contaminated honey has been associated with a number of cases. Parents and caregivers are therefore warned not to feed honey to the infants before the age of 1 year.
Wound botulism is rare and occurs when the spores get into an open wound and are able to reproduce in an anaerobic environment. The symptoms are similar to the foodborne botulism, but may take up to 2 weeks to appear. This form of the disease has been associated with substance abuse, particularly when injecting black tar heroin.
Inhalation botulism is rare and does not occur naturally, for example it is associated with accidental or intentional events which result in release of the toxins in aerosols. Inhalation botulism exhibits a similar clinical footprint to foodborne botulism. The median lethal dose for humans has been estimated at 2 nanograms of botulinum toxin per kilogram of bodyweight, which is approximately 3 times greater than in foodborne cases.
Following inhalation of the toxin, symptoms become visible between 1–3 days, with longer onset times for lower levels of intoxication. Symptoms proceed in a similar manner to ingestion of botulinum toxin and culminate in muscular paralysis and respiratory failure.
If exposure to the toxin via aerosol inhalation is suspected, additional exposure to the patient and others must be prevented. The patient's clothing must be removed and stored in plastic bags until it can be washed thoroughly with soap and water. The patient should shower and be decontaminated immediately.
Waterborne botulism could theoretically result from the ingestion of the pre-formed toxin. However, as common water treatment processes destroy the toxin, the risk is considered low.
Botulism of undetermined origin usually involves adult cases where no food or wound source can be identified. These cases are comparable to infant botulism and may occur when the normal gut flora has been altered as a result of surgical procedures or antibiotic therapy.
Adverse effects of the pure toxin have been reported as a result of its medical and/or cosmetic use in patients, see more on 'Botox' below.
The bacterium C. botulinum is the same bacterium that is used to produce Botox, a pharmaceutical product predominantly injected for clinical and cosmetic use. Botox treatments employ the purified and heavily diluted botulinum neurotoxin type A. Treatment is administered in the medical setting, tailored according to the needs of the patient and is usually well tolerated although occasional side effects are observed.
Diagnosis is usually based on clinical history and clinical examination followed by laboratory confirmation including demonstrating the presence of botulinum toxin in serum, stool or food, or a culture of C. botulinum from stool, wound or food. Misdiagnosis of botulism sometimes occurs as it is often confused with stroke, Guillain-Barré syndrome, or myasthenia gravis.
Antitoxin should be administered as soon as possible after a clinical diagnosis. Early administration is effective in reducing mortality rates. Severe botulism cases require supportive treatment, especially mechanical ventilation, which may be required for weeks or even months. Antibiotics are not required . A vaccine against botulism exists but it is rarely used as its effectiveness has not been fully evaluated and it has demonstrated negative side effects.
Prevention of foodborne botulism is based on good practice in food preparation particularly during heating/sterilization and hygiene. Foodborne botulism may be prevented by the inactivation of the bacterium and its spores in heat-sterilized or canned products or by inhibiting bacterial growth and toxin production in other products. The vegetative forms of bacteria can be destroyed by boiling but the spores can remain viable after boiling even for several hours. However, the spores can be killed by very high temperature treatments such as commercial canning.
Commercial heat pasteurization may not be sufficient to kill all spores and therefore the safety of these products must be based on preventing bacterial growth and toxin production. Refrigeration temperatures combined with salt content and/or acidic conditions will prevent the growth of the bacteria and formation of toxin.
The WHO Five Keys to Safer Food serve as the basis for educational programmes to train food handlers and educate the consumers. They are especially important in preventing food poisoning.
The Five Keys are:
Botulism outbreaks are rare but are public health emergencies that require rapid recognition to identify the disease source, distinguish outbreak types , prevent additional cases and effectively administer treatment to affected patients.
Successful treatment depends significantly on early diagnosis and the rapid administration of the botulinum antitoxin.
WHO's role in responding to outbreaks of botulism that may be of international concern is as follows.
Surveillance and detection: WHO supports the strengthening of national surveillance and international alert systems to ensure rapid local outbreak detection and an efficient international response. WHO’s main tool for these activities of surveillance, coordination and response is the use of the International Network of Food Safety Authorities which links national authorities in Member States in charge of managing food safety events. This network is managed jointly by FAO and WHO.
Risk assessment: WHO response is based on a risk assessment methodology that includes consideration of whether the outbreak is natural, accidental, or, possibly, intentional. WHO also provides scientific assessments as basis for international food safety standards, guidelines and recommendations developed by the Codex Alimentarius Commission.
Containment at the disease source: WHO coordinates with national and local authorities in order to contain outbreaks at their source.
Delivery of assistance: WHO coordinates between international agencies, experts, national laboratories, airlines and commercial organizations to mobilize response equipment, materials and supplies, including the provision and administration of botulinum antitoxin.
Related

========================================
breast-cancer
========================================
Breast cancer is a disease in which abnormal breast cells grow out of control and form tumours. If left unchecked, the tumours can spread throughout the body and become fatal.
Breast cancer cells begin inside the milk ducts and/or the milk-producing lobules of the breast. The earliest form is not life-threatening and can be detected in early stages. Cancer cells can spread into nearby breast tissue . This creates tumours that cause lumps or thickening. Invasive cancers can spread to nearby lymph nodes or other organs . Metastasis can be life-threatening and fatal.
Treatment is based on the person, the type of cancer and its spread. Treatment combines surgery, radiation therapy and medications.
In 2022, there were 2.3 million women diagnosed with breast cancer and 670 000 deaths globally. Breast cancer occurs in every country of the world in women at any age after puberty but with increasing rates in later life. Global estimates reveal striking inequities in the breast cancer burden according to human development. For instance, in countries with a very high Human Development Index , 1 in 12 women will be diagnosed with breast cancer in their lifetime and 1 in 71 women die of it. In contrast, in countries with a low HDI; while only 1 in 27 women is diagnosed with breast cancer in their lifetime, 1 in 48 women will die from it.
Female gender is the strongest breast cancer risk factor. Approximately 99% of breast cancers occur in women and 0.5–1% of breast cancers occur in men. The treatment of breast cancer in men follows the same principles of management as for women.
Certain factors increase the risk of breast cancer including increasing age, obesity, harmful use of alcohol, family history of breast cancer, history of radiation exposure, reproductive history , tobacco use and postmenopausal hormone therapy. Approximately half of breast cancers develop in women who have no identifiable breast cancer risk factor other than gender and age . Family history of breast cancer increases the risk of breast cancer, but most women diagnosed with breast cancer do not have a known family history of the disease. Lack of a known family history does not necessarily mean that a woman is at reduced risk.
Certain inherited high penetrance gene mutations greatly increase breast cancer risk, the most dominant being mutations in the genes BRCA1, BRCA2 and PALB-2. Women found to have mutations in these major genes may consider risk reduction strategies such as surgical removal of both breasts or chemoprevention strategies. Most people will not experience any symptoms when the cancer is still early hence the importance of early detection. Breast cancer can have combinations of symptoms, especially when it is more advanced. Symptoms of breast cancer can include:
People with an abnormal breast lump should seek medical care, even if the lump does not hurt. Most breast lumps are not cancer. Breast lumps that are cancerous are more likely to be successfully treated when they are small and have not spread to nearby lymph nodes. Breast cancers may spread to other areas of the body and trigger other symptoms. Often, the most common first detectable site of spread is to the lymph nodes under the arm although it is possible to have cancer-bearing lymph nodes that cannot be felt. Over time, cancerous cells may spread to other organs including the lungs, liver, brain and bones. Once they reach these sites, new cancer-related symptoms such as bone pain or headaches may appear. Treatment for breast cancer depends on the subtype of cancer and how much it has spread outside of the breast to lymph nodes or to other parts of the body .
Doctors combine treatments to minimize the chances of the cancer coming back . These include:
Treatments for breast cancer are more effective and are better tolerated when started early and taken to completion. Surgery may remove just the cancerous tissue or the whole breast . Surgery may also remove lymph nodes to assess the cancer’s ability to spread.
Radiation therapy treats residual microscopic cancers left behind in the breast tissue and/or lymph nodes and minimizes the chances of cancer recurring on the chest wall.
Advanced cancers can erode through the skin to cause open sores but are not necessarily painful. Women with breast wounds that do not heal should seek medical care to have a biopsy performed.
Medicines to treat breast cancers are selected based on the biological properties of the cancer as determined by special tests . The great majority of drugs used for breast cancer are already on the WHO Essential Medicines List .
Lymph nodes are removed at the time of cancer surgery for invasive cancers. Complete removal of the lymph node bed under the arm in the past was thought to be necessary to prevent the spread of cancer. A smaller lymph node procedure called “sentinel node biopsy” is now preferred as it has fewer complications. Medical treatments for breast cancers, which may be given before or after surgery, is based on the biological subtyping of the cancers. Certain subtypes of breast cancer are more aggressive than others such as triple negative , progesterone receptor (PR) or HER-2 receptor). Cancer that express the estrogen receptor (ER) and/or progesterone receptor (PR) are likely to respond to endocrine therapies such as tamoxifen or aromatase inhibitors. These medicines are taken orally for 5–10 years and reduce the chance of recurrence of these “hormone-positive” cancers by nearly half. Endocrine therapies can cause symptoms of menopause but are generally well tolerated.
Cancers that do not express ER or PR are “hormone receptor negative” and need to be treated with chemotherapy unless the cancer is very small. The chemotherapy regimens available today are very effective in reducing the chances of cancer spread or recurrence and are generally given as outpatient therapy. Chemotherapy for breast cancer generally does not require hospital admission in the absence of complications.
Breast cancers that independently overexpress a molecule called the HER-2/neu oncogene are amenable to treatment with targeted biological agents such as trastuzumab. When targeted biological therapies are given, they are combined with chemotherapy to make them effective at killing cancer cells.
Radiotherapy plays a very important role in treating breast cancer. With early-stage breast cancers, radiation can prevent a woman having to undergo a mastectomy. With later stage cancers, radiotherapy can reduce cancer recurrence risk even when a mastectomy has been performed. For advanced stages of breast cancer, in some circumstances, radiation therapy may reduce the likelihood of dying of the disease.
The effectiveness of breast cancer therapies depends on the full course of treatment. Partial treatment is less likely to lead to a positive outcome. Age-standardized breast cancer mortality in high-income countries dropped by 40% between the 1980s and 2020 (1). Countries that have succeeded in reducing breast cancer mortality have been able to achieve an annual breast cancer mortality reduction of 2–4% per year. The strategies for improving breast cancer outcomes depend on fundamental health system strengthening to deliver the treatments that are already known to work. These are also important for the management of other cancers and other non-malignant noncommunicable diseases . For example, having reliable referral pathways from primary care facilities to district hospitals to dedicated cancer centres.
The establishment of reliable referral pathways from primary care facilities to secondary hospitals to dedicated cancer centres is the same approach as is required for the management of cervical cancer, lung cancer, colorectal cancer and prostate cancer. To that end, breast cancer is a so-called index disease whereby pathways are created that can be followed for the management of other cancers. The objective of the WHO Global Breast Cancer Initiative is to reduce global breast cancer mortality by 2.5% per year, thereby averting 2.5 million breast cancer deaths globally between 2020 and 2040. Reducing global breast cancer mortality by 2.5% per year would avert 25% of breast cancer deaths by 2030 and 40% by 2040 among women under 70 years of age. The three pillars toward achieving these objectives are: health promotion for early detection; timely diagnosis; and comprehensive breast cancer management. By providing public health education to improve awareness among women of the signs and symptoms of breast cancer and, together with their families, understand the importance of early detection and treatment, more women would consult medical practitioners when breast cancer is first suspected, and before any cancer present is advanced. This is possible even in the absence of mammographic screening that is impractical in many countries at the present time.
Notes
Related
Global Breast Cancer Initiative
More on cancer News
Fact sheets

========================================
brucellosis
========================================
Brucellosis is a bacterial disease caused by various Brucella species, which mainly infect cattle, swine, goats, sheep and dogs. Humans generally acquire the disease through direct contact with infected animals, by eating or drinking contaminated animal products or by inhaling airborne agents. Most cases are caused by ingesting unpasteurized milk or cheese from infected goats or sheep.
Brucellosis is one of the most widespread zoonoses transmitted by animals and in endemic areas, human brucellosis has serious public health consequences. Expansion of animal industries and urbanization, and the lack of hygienic measures in animal husbandry and in food handling, partly account for brucellosis remaining a public health hazard.
Brucellosis is found globally and is a reportable disease in most countries. It affects people of all ages and both sexes. In the general population, most cases are caused by the consumption of raw milk or its derivatives such as fresh cheese. Most of these cases are from sheep and goat products.
The disease is also considered an occupational hazard for people who work in the livestock sector. People who work with animals and are in contact with blood, placenta, foetuses and uterine secretions have an increased risk of contracting the disease. This method of transmission primarily affects farmers, butchers, hunters, veterinarians and laboratory personnel.
Worldwide, Brucella melitensis is the most prevalent species causing human brucellosis, owing in part to difficulties in immunizing free-ranging goats and sheep.
Human-to-human transmission is very rare.
Prevention of brucellosis is based on surveillance and the prevention of risk factors. The most effective prevention strategy is the elimination of infection in animals. Vaccination of cattle, goats and sheep is recommended in enzootic areas with high prevalence rates. Serological or other testing and culling can also be effective in areas with low prevalence. In countries where eradication in animals through vaccination or elimination of infected animals is not feasible, prevention of human infection is primarily based on raising awareness, food-safety measures, occupational hygiene and laboratory safety.
Pasteurization of milk for direct consumption and for creating derivatives such as cheese is an important step to preventing transmission from animals to humans. Education campaigns about avoiding unpasteurized milk products can be effective, as well as policies on its sale.
In agricultural work and meat-processing, protective barriers and correct handling and disposal of afterbirths, animal carcasses and internal organs is an important prevention strategy. Brucellosis typically causes flu-like symptoms, including fever, weakness, malaise and weight loss. However, the disease may present in many atypical forms. In many patients the symptoms are mild and, therefore, the diagnosis may not be considered. The incubation period of the disease can be highly variable, ranging from 1 week to 2 months, but usually 2–4 weeks.
Treatment options include doxycycline 100 mg twice a day for 45 days, plus streptomycin 1 g daily for 15 days. The main alternative therapy is doxycycline at 100 mg, twice a day for 45 days, plus rifampicin at 15mg/kg/day for 45 days. Experience suggests that streptomycin may be substituted with gentamicin 5mg/kg/daily for 7–10 days, but no study directly comparing the two regimes is currently available. The optimal treatment for pregnant women, neonates and children under 8 is not yet determined; for children, options include trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole combined with an aminoglycoside or rifampicin.
WHO provides technical advice to member states through provision of standards, information and guidance for the management of brucellosis in humans and animals. The Organization works to support the coordination and sharing of information between the public health and animal health sectors. In collaboration with the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations , the World Organisation for Animal Health and the Mediterranean Zoonoses Control Programme , WHO supports countries in the prevention and management of the disease through the Global Early Warning System for Major Animal Diseases . News
Fact sheets

========================================
burns
========================================
A burn is an injury to the skin or other organic tissue primarily caused by heat or due to radiation, radioactivity, electricity, friction or contact with chemicals. Thermal burns occur when some or all the cells in the skin or other tissues are destroyed by:
Burns are a global public health problem, accounting for an estimated 180 000 deaths annually. The majority of these occur in low- and middle-income countries and almost two thirds occur in the WHO African and South-East Asia Regions.
In many high-income countries, burn death rates have been decreasing, and the rate of child deaths from burns is currently over 7 times higher in low- and middle-income countries than in high-income countries. Non-fatal burns are a leading cause of morbidity, including prolonged hospitalization, disfigurement and disability, often with resulting stigma and rejection. Direct care costs for burns vary widely but tend towards being generally expensive with a 2014 systematic review finding a mean total healthcare cost per burn patient of US$ 88 218 . In South Africa an estimated US$ 26 million is spent annually for care of burns from kerosene cookstove incidents. Indirect costs such as lost wages, prolonged care for deformities and emotional trauma, and commitment of family resources, also contribute to the socioeconomic impact. Females have slightly higher rates of death from burns compared to males according to the most recent data. This contrasts with the usual injury pattern, where rates of injury for the various injury mechanisms tend to be higher in males than females.
The higher risk for females is associated with open fire cooking, or inherently unsafe cookstoves, which can ignite loose clothing. Open flames used for heating and lighting also pose risks, and self-directed or interpersonal violence are also factors .
Along with adult women, children are particularly vulnerable to burns. Burns are the fifth most common cause of non-fatal childhood injuries. While a major risk is improper adult supervision, a considerable number of burn injuries in children result from child maltreatment. There are important regional differences in burn rates. People living in low- and middle-income countries are at higher risk for burns than people living in high-income countries. Within all countries however, burn risk correlates with socioeconomic status.
There are a number of other risk factors for burns, including:
Burns occur mainly in the home and workplace. Community surveys in Bangladesh and Ethiopia show that 80–90% of burns occur at home. Children and women are usually burned in domestic kitchens, from upset receptacles containing hot liquids or flames, or from cookstove explosions. Men are most likely to be burned in the workplace due to fire, scalds, chemical and electrical burns.
Burns are preventable. High-income countries have made considerable progress in lowering rates of burn deaths, through a combination of prevention strategies and improvements in the care of people affected by burns. Most of these advances in prevention and care have been incompletely applied in low- and middle-income countries. Increased efforts to do so would likely lead to significant reductions in rates of burn-related death and disability. Prevention strategies should address the hazards for specific burn injuries, education for vulnerable populations and training of communities in first aid. An effective burn prevention plan should be multisectoral and include broad efforts to: The document A WHO plan for burn prevention and care discusses these 7 components in detail. In addition, there are several specific recommendations for individuals, communities and public health officials to reduce burn risk.
Basic guidance on first aid for burns is provided below.
WHO is promoting interventions that have been shown to be successful in reducing the incidence of burns.
The Organization is also supporting the development and use of a global burn registry for globally harmonized data collection on burns and increased collaboration between global and national networks to increase the number of effective programmes for burn prevention.
References
Related

========================================
buruli-ulcer-(mycobacterium-ulcerans-infection)
========================================
Overview
Buruli ulcer is caused by a bacterium called Mycobacterium ulcerans. The bacterium produces a toxin that causes the skin damage. Without early treatment, Buruli ulcer can lead to long-term disability. The germ that causes Buruli ulcer belongs to the same family of those that cause tuberculosis and leprosy. It is still unclear how people get Buruli ulcer from the environment. Buruli ulcer has been reported in 33 countries in Africa, the Americas, Asia and the Western Pacific. Most cases occur in tropical and subtropical regions except in Australia and Japan. Out of the 33 countries, 14 regularly report data to WHO.
The annual number of cases can be found under Global Health Observatory.
The exact mode of transmission of M. ulcerans is still unknown. Buruli ulcer often starts as a painless swelling , a large painless area of induration or a diffuse painless swelling of the legs, arms or face . The disease may progress with no pain and fever. Without treatment or sometimes during antibiotics treatment, the nodule, plaque or oedema will ulcerate within 4 weeks. Bone is occasionally affected, causing deformities.
The disease has been classified into three categories of severity: Category I, single small lesion less than 5 cm on diameter; Category II, non-ulcerative and ulcerative plaque and oedematous forms between 5-15 cm ; and Category III lesions more than 15 cm in diameter including, disseminated and mixed forms such as, osteomyelitis and joint involvement .
Lesions frequently occur in the limbs: 35% on the upper limbs, 55% on the lower limbs, and 10% on the other parts of the body. Health workers should be careful in the diagnosis of Buruli ulcer in patients with lower leg lesions to avoid confusion with other causes of ulceration such as diabetes, arterial and venous insufficiency lesion.
In most cases, experienced health professionals in endemic areas can make a reliable clinical diagnosis, but training is essential.
Differential diagnoses of Buruli ulcer include tropical phagedenic ulcers, chronic lower leg ulcers due to arterial and venous insufficiency , diabetic ulcers, cutaneous leishmaniasis, extensive ulcerative yaws and ulcers caused by Haemophilus ducreyi.
Early nodular and papular lesions may be confused with insect bite, boils, lipomas, ganglions, lymph node tuberculosis, onchocerciasis nodules or deep fungal subcutaneous infections. Cellulitis may look like oedema caused by M. ulcerans infection but in the case of cellulitis, there is pain and fever. HIV infection complicates the management of the patient, making clinical progression more aggressive and resulting in poor treatment outcomes. WHO has published a technical guide to help clinicians in the management of co-infection. Four standard laboratory methods can be used to confirm Buruli ulcer: IS2404 polymerase chain reaction , direct microscopy, histopathology and culture. The bacterium grows best at temperatures between 29–33 °C and needs a low oxygen concentration. In 2019, WHO established the Buruli ulcer Laboratory Network for Africa (1) to help strengthen PCR confirmation in 9 endemic countries in Africa. Thirteen laboratories participate in this network, supported by the American Leprosy Missions, Anesvad, Raoul Follereau Foundation and the Foundation for Innovative Diagnostic and coordinated by the Pasteur Center of Cameroon.
In 2021, WHO completed an online consultation for a draft document on Target Product Profiles to develop rapid test for the diagnosis of Buruli ulcer. This document was published in 2022 and is intended to guide manufacturers in the development of appropriate diagnostic tests. With the availability of simple oral treatment for Buruli ulcer, a rapid test to allow early confirmation of diagnosis can facilitate the timely treatment of the disease. The current turnaround time of a PCR test is too long to guide early treatment decisions.
Treatment consists of a combination of antibiotics and complementary treatments. Treatment guidance for health workers can be found in the WHO publication Treatment of mycobacterium ulcerans disease .
A recent study suggests the combination of rifampicin and clarithromycin is now the recommended treatment.
In Australia, a combination of rifampicin and moxifloxacin is routinely used with good results, but its effectiveness has not been proven in a randomized trial.
Priority research for treatment is to shorten the duration of treatment from 8 weeks and studies are in progress to achieve that (2). Interventions such as wound and lymphoedema management and surgery are used to speed up healing, thereby shortening the duration of hospitalization. Physiotherapy is needed in severe cases to prevent disability. Those left with disability require long-term rehabilitation. These same interventions are applicable to other neglected tropical diseases, such as leprosy and lymphatic filariasis.
There are currently no primary preventive measures for Buruli ulcer. The mode of transmission is not known. Bacillus Calmette–Guérin vaccination appears to provide limited protection.
The objective of Buruli ulcer control is to minimize the suffering, disabilities and socioeconomic burden. Early detection and antibiotic treatment are the cornerstones of the control strategy. In many countries, community health workers play a critical role in case detection. These are the core indicators to measure the progress in the control of Buruli ulcer
WHO provides technical guidance, develops policies, and coordinates control and research efforts. WHO brings together all major actors involved in Buruli ulcer on a regular basis to share information, coordinate disease control and research efforts, and monitor progress.
WHO supports worked towards three research priorities:
To ensure efficiency, sustainability and scale, WHO recommends that Buruli ulcer control should be integrated within skin NTDs approach adapted to the diseases present in a particular country. WHO has developed a Skin App to assist health workers in the field in the diagnosis of skin NTDs including Buruli ulcer.
References
Related
Fact sheets

========================================
campylobacter
========================================
The high incidence of Campylobacter diarrhoea, as well as its duration and possible complications, makes it highly important from a socio-economic perspective. In developing countries, Campylobacter infections in children under the age of 2 years are especially frequent, sometimes resulting in death.
Campylobacter are mainly spiral-shaped, “S”-shaped, or curved, rod-shaped bacteria. Currently, there are 17 species and 6 subspecies assigned to the genus Campylobacter, of which the most frequently reported in human diseases are C. jejuni and C. coli. Other species such as C. lari and C. upsaliensis have also been isolated from patients with diarrhoeal disease, but are reported less frequently.
Campylobacteriosis is the disease caused by the infection with Campylobacter:
Campylobacter species are widely distributed in most warm-blooded animals. They are prevalent in food animals such as poultry, cattle, pigs, sheep and ostriches; and in pets, including cats and dogs. The bacteria have also been found in shellfish.
The main route of transmission is generally believed to be foodborne, via undercooked meat and meat products, as well as raw or contaminated milk. Contaminated water or ice is also a source of infection. A proportion of cases occur following contact with contaminated water during recreational activities.
Campylobacteriosis is a zoonosis, a disease transmitted to humans from animals or animal products. Most often, carcasses or meat are contaminated by Campylobacter from faeces during slaughtering. In animals, Campylobacter seldom causes disease.
The relative contribution of each of the above sources to the overall burden of disease is unclear but consumption of undercooked contaminated poultry is believed to be a major contributor. Since common-source outbreaks account for a rather small proportion of cases, the vast majority of reports refer to sporadic cases, with no easily discernible pattern.
Estimating the importance of all known sources is therefore extremely difficult. In addition, the wide occurrence of Campylobacter also hinders the development of control strategies throughout the food chain. However, in countries where specific strategies have been put in place to reduce the prevalence of Campylobacter in live poultry, a similar reduction in human cases is observed.
Treatment is not generally required, except electrolyte replacement and rehydration. Antimicrobial treatment is recommended in invasive cases or to eliminate the carrier state (the condition of people who harbour Campylobacter in their bodies and keep shedding the bacteria while remaining asymptomatic).
There are a number of strategies that can be used to prevent disease from Campylobacter:
In partnership with other stakeholders, WHO is strongly advocating the importance of food safety as an essential element in ensuring access to safe and nutritious diets. WHO is providing policies and recommendations that cover the entire food chain from production to consumption, making use of different types of expertise across different sectors.
WHO is working towards the strengthening of food safety systems in an increasingly globalized world. Setting international food safety standards, enhancing disease surveillance, educating consumers and training food handlers in safe food handling are amongst the most critical interventions in the prevention of foodborne illnesses.
In collaboration with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations , the World Organisation for Animal Health and the WHO Collaborating Centre at the University of Utrecht, WHO published the report The global view of campylobacteriosis in 2012.
WHO is strengthening the capacities of national and regional laboratories in the surveillance of foodborne pathogens, such as Campylobacter and Salmonella.
WHO is also promoting the integrated surveillance of antimicrobial resistance of pathogens in the food chain, collecting samples from humans, food and animals and analysing data across the sectors.
WHO, jointly with FAO, is assisting Member States by coordinating international efforts for early detection and response to foodborne disease outbreaks through the network of national authorities in Member States.
WHO also provides scientific assessments as basis for international food standards, guidelines and recommendations developed by the FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius Commission to prevent foodborne diseases.
The following guidance will help people to stay safe while travelling:
WHO provides the following guidance for people handling food:
Related

========================================
cancer
========================================
Cancer is a generic term for a large group of diseases that can affect any part of the body. Other terms used are malignant tumours and neoplasms. One defining feature of cancer is the rapid creation of abnormal cells that grow beyond their usual boundaries, and which can then invade adjoining parts of the body and spread to other organs; the latter process is referred to as metastasis. Widespread metastases are the primary cause of death from cancer.
Cancer is a leading cause of death worldwide, accounting for nearly 10 million deaths in 2020 (1). The most common in 2020 were:
The most common causes of cancer death in 2020 were:
Each year, approximately 400 000 children develop cancer. The most common cancers vary between countries. Cervical cancer is the most common in 23 countries. Cancer arises from the transformation of normal cells into tumour cells in a multi-stage process that generally progresses from a pre-cancerous lesion to a malignant tumour. These changes are the result of the interaction between a person's genetic factors and three categories of external agents, including:
WHO, through its cancer research agency, the International Agency for Research on Cancer , maintains a classification of cancer-causing agents.
The incidence of cancer rises dramatically with age, most likely due to a build-up of risks for specific cancers that increase with age. The overall risk accumulation is combined with the tendency for cellular repair mechanisms to be less effective as a person grows older.
Tobacco use, alcohol consumption, unhealthy diet, physical inactivity and air pollution are risk factors for cancer and other noncommunicable diseases. Some chronic infections are risk factors for cancer; this is a particular issue in low- and middle-income countries. Approximately 13% of cancers diagnosed in 2018 globally were attributed to carcinogenic infections, including Helicobacter pylori, human papillomavirus , hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, and Epstein-Barr virus (2).
Hepatitis B and C viruses and some types of HPV increase the risk for liver and cervical cancer, respectively. Infection with HIV increases the risk of developing cervical cancer six-fold and substantially increases the risk of developing select other cancers such as Kaposi sarcoma.
Between 30 and 50% of cancers can currently be prevented by avoiding risk factors and implementing existing evidence-based prevention strategies. The cancer burden can also be reduced through early detection of cancer and appropriate treatment and care of patients who develop cancer. Many cancers have a high chance of cure if diagnosed early and treated appropriately. Cancer risk can be reduced by: Cancer mortality is reduced when cases are detected and treated early. There are two components of early detection: early diagnosis and screening.
When identified early, cancer is more likely to respond to treatment and can result in a greater probability of survival with less morbidity, as well as less expensive treatment. Significant improvements can be made in the lives of cancer patients by detecting cancer early and avoiding delays in care.
Early diagnosis consists of three components:
Early diagnosis of symptomatic cancers is relevant in all settings and the majority of cancers. Cancer programmes should be designed to reduce delays in, and barriers to, diagnosis, treatment and supportive care. Screening aims to identify individuals with findings suggestive of a specific cancer or pre-cancer before they have developed symptoms. When abnormalities are identified during screening, further tests to establish a definitive diagnosis should follow, as should referral for treatment if cancer is proven to be present.
Screening programmes are effective for some but not all cancer types and in general are far more complex and resource-intensive than early diagnosis as they require special equipment and dedicated personnel. Even when screening programmes are established, early diagnosis programmes are still necessary to identify those cancer cases occurring in people who do not meet the age or risk factor criteria for screening.
Patient selection for screening programmes is based on age and risk factors to avoid excessive false positive studies. Examples of screening methods are:
Quality assurance is required for both screening and early diagnosis programmes.
A correct cancer diagnosis is essential for appropriate and effective treatment because every cancer type requires a specific treatment regimen. Treatment usually includes surgery, radiotherapy, and/or systemic therapy . Proper selection of a treatment regimen takes into consideration both the cancer and the individual being treated. Completion of the treatment protocol in a defined period of time is important to achieve the predicted therapeutic result. Determining the goals of treatment is an important first step. The primary goal is generally to cure cancer or to considerably prolong life. Improving the patient's quality of life is also an important goal. This can be achieved by support for the patient’s physical, psychosocial and spiritual well-being and palliative care in terminal stages of cancer. Some of the most common cancer types, such as breast cancer, cervical cancer, oral cancer, and colorectal cancer, have high cure probabilities when detected early and treated according to best practices.
Some cancer types, such as testicular seminoma and different types of leukaemia and lymphoma in children, also have high cure rates if appropriate treatment is provided, even when cancerous cells are present in other areas of the body.
There is, however, a significant variation in treatment availability between countries of different income levels; comprehensive treatment is reportedly available in more than 90% of high-income countries but less than 15% of low-income countries (3).
Palliative care is treatment to relieve, rather than cure, symptoms and suffering caused by cancer and to improve the quality of life of patients and their families. Palliative care can help people live more comfortably. It is particularly needed in places with a high proportion of patients in advanced stages of cancer where there is little chance of cure.
Relief from physical, psychosocial, and spiritual problems through palliative care is possible for more than 90% of patients with advanced stages of cancer. Effective public health strategies, comprising community- and home-based care, are essential to provide pain relief and palliative care for patients and their families.
In 2017, the World Health Assembly passed the Resolution Cancer prevention and control in the context of an integrated approach that urges governments and WHO to accelerate action to achieve the targets specified in the Global Action Plan for the prevention and control of NCDs 2013-2020 and the 2030 UN Agenda for Sustainable Development to reduce premature mortality from cancer.
WHO and IARC collaborate with other UN organizations, inlcuing the International Atomic Energy Agency, and partners to:
(1) Ferlay J, Ervik M, Lam F, Colombet M, Mery L, Piñeros M, et al. Global Cancer Observatory: Cancer Today. Lyon: International Agency for Research on Cancer; 2020 . (2) de Martel C, Georges D, Bray F, Ferlay J, Clifford GM. Global burden of cancer attributable to infections in 2018: a worldwide incidence analysis. Lancet Glob Health. 2020;8(2):e180-e190. (3) Assessing national capacity for the prevention and control of noncommunicable diseases: report of the 2019 global survey. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020. Related
Cancer Cervical cancer
Cervical cancer country profiles
Cervical Cancer Knowledge Repository
News
Fact sheets

========================================
Candidiasis (yeast infection)
========================================
Candidiasis, also known as a yeast infection, is a fungal infection primarily caused by Candida yeasts. Many of these yeasts are normally present in the human body as part of the natural microbiome, or in the surrounding environment, often without causing any problems. However, when conditions allow, such as a weakened immune system or changes in the body's natural environment , Candida can overgrow and cause an infection. Candidiasis can affect various parts of the body, leading to a range of symptoms. Common types of candidiasis include vulvovaginal candidiasis , which affects the vagina; oral candidiasis , which affects the mouth and throat; and invasive candidiasis, which is a serious systemic infection that can affect any organ in the body. Invasive candidiasis is a significant concern in critically ill and immunocompromised patients. While generally treatable with antifungal medications, some types can be hard to treat. For example, Candida auris is a multi-drug-resistant fungal species that has been responsible for outbreaks in hospitals and long-term care facilities. Prevention and proper management are crucial to reduce the risk and spread of these infections. Vaginal yeast infections Vulvovaginal candidiasis , commonly known as a vaginal yeast infection, is an infection of the vagina and vulva caused by an overgrowth of Candida yeast. Several factors can contribute to the overgrowth of Candida in the vagina. Changes in the vagina's normal acidity, natural microbiome or hormonal balance can create an environment that encourages yeast overgrowth. Antibiotics can kill healthy bacteria in the vagina, which help maintain balance and keep yeast in check. Fluctuations in hormone levels, such as those during pregnancy, the menstrual cycle or the use of birth control pills, can increase the risk of yeast infections. Uncontrolled diabetes, leading to persistently high blood sugar levels, can also promote yeast growth. Additionally, a weakened immune system due to conditions or medications can make one more susceptible to yeast infections. The symptoms of a vaginal yeast infection can be uncomfortable. Intense itching in the vagina and around the vulva is a common complaint. Redness and soreness of the vulva might also be experienced, accompanied by a thick, white, curd-like vaginal discharge. Painful urination and discomfort or pain during sexual intercourse can also occur. Yeast infections primarily affect the vagina and vulva and are not a typical cause of urinary tract infections. Treatment for vaginal yeast infections typically involves antifungal medications. Topical treatments, such as creams, ointments or suppositories containing antifungal medications like clotrimazole, are commonly used. Prescription oral antifungal drugs, such as fluconazole, are also available. However, resistance to some antifungal medications is spreading and treatment does not always work. Home remedies should be used with caution and discussed with a health-care provider before use. While not officially classified as a sexually transmitted infection, sexual activity can contribute to the development of VVC. Treating male partners is generally not recommended unless they exhibit symptoms themselves. Oral thrush is a candidiasis that occurs in the mouth and throat. Several factors can lead to the development of oral thrush. People with compromised or immature immune systems, such as infants, older people and individuals living with HIV, are more prone to oral thrush. Antibiotics can disrupt the normal balance of microorganisms in the mouth, allowing Candida to overgrow. Steroid inhalers for asthma can also increase the risk of oral thrush. Additionally, ill-fitting dentures or poor oral hygiene can create an environment conducive to yeast overgrowth. Oral thrush is characterized by creamy, white lesions on the tongue, inner cheeks and gums, or hard white plaques that cannot be scraped off. Individuals may experience pain or soreness in the mouth, making it difficult to eat or swallow. Cracking and redness at the corners of the mouth, red, shiny patches on the palate or tongue, as well as altered or lost sense of taste, can also occur. Treatment for oral thrush typically involves antifungal medications. Topical treatments, such as antifungal mouthwashes or lozenges, are commonly used. Oral antifungal drugs may also be prescribed. Maintaining good oral hygiene through regular brushing and flossing can help prevent yeast overgrowth. Thrush is a common condition in babies, especially newborns, often appearing as white patches on the tongue or inner cheeks. While generally not harmful, it can cause discomfort during feeding. Treatment typically involves a liquid antifungal medication prescribed by a doctor. Hospitalized patients with cancer or who have received antibiotics, had invasive procedures such as intravenous catheters or had surgery can get invasive Candida infections, such as through the bloodstream. Some Candida species, including Candida auris, are developing resistance to antifungal drugs, making them difficult to eradicate from hospital surfaces and equipment. These infections are serious and require urgent intravenous antifungal therapy. Tests and treatments also need to improve and be more widely available, especially in low- and middle-income countries. There is extensive discussion about the connection between diet and candidiasis, including whether high sugar intake can cause yeast infections. Some individuals follow strict diets to limit yeast overgrowth, but scientific evidence supporting their effectiveness is limited. Consult a health-care professional or registered dietitian before making significant dietary changes. Maintaining good hygiene, especially in moist areas, is important in preventing candidiasis on the skin. Good oral hygiene, cleaning dentures properly, controlling diabetes, avoiding smoking and using steroid inhalers properly can help prevent oral candidiasis. Using antibiotics only when prescribed and necessary can help prevent disruptions in the body's natural microbiome. Managing underlying conditions such as diabetes can reduce the risk of candidiasis. For those with weakened immune systems, regular medical check-ups and prophylactic antifungal medications may be necessary to prevent invasive candidiasis. For vulvovaginal candidiasis, wearing cotton underwear and loose clothing, avoiding synthetic fabrics, changing out of sweaty gym wear and swimsuits quickly, and not douching can all help to prevent yeast infections. Avoiding scented or harsh personal care products can also help prevent irritation and reduce the risk of yeast infections. Athletes and individuals who engage in intense physical activity, as well as children, should be mindful of their hygiene. In environments where physical contact is frequent , it is important to clean and dry equipment and clothing regularly. WHO recognizes the increasing global public health concern posed by fungal infections and is committed to addressing this threat through various initiatives. In 2022, WHO published the first-ever fungal priority pathogens list to guide research, development and public health action. In 2024, WHO published Recommendations for the treatment of Trichomonas vaginalis, Mycoplasma genitalium, Candida albicans, bacterial vaginosis, and human papillomavirus ‎. In 2025, WHO published its first-ever reports on fungal tests and treatments. By prioritizing fungal pathogens and promoting evidence-based strategies, WHO aims to strengthen the global response to fungal infections and antifungal resistance, ultimately improving public health outcomes. Related
News
Fact sheets

========================================
cardiovascular-diseases-(cvds)
========================================
Cardiovascular diseases are a group of disorders of the heart and blood vessels. They include:
Heart attacks and strokes are usually acute events and are mainly caused by a blockage that prevents blood from flowing to the heart or brain. The most common reason for this is a build-up of fatty deposits on the inner walls of the blood vessels that supply the heart or brain. Strokes can be caused by bleeding from a blood vessel in the brain or from blood clots.
The most important behavioural risk factors of heart disease and stroke are unhealthy diet, physical inactivity, tobacco use and harmful use of alcohol. Amongst environmental risk factors, air pollution is an important factor. The effects of behavioural risk factors may show up in individuals as raised blood pressure, raised blood glucose, raised blood lipids, and overweight and obesity. These “intermediate risks factors” can be measured in primary care facilities and indicate an increased risk of heart attack, stroke, heart failure and other complications.
Cessation of tobacco use, reduction of salt in the diet, eating more fruit and vegetables, regular physical activity and avoiding harmful use of alcohol have been shown to reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease. Health policies that create conducive environments for making healthy choices affordable and available, as well as improving air quality and reducing pollution, are essential for motivating people to adopt and sustain healthy behaviours.
There are also a number of underlying determinants of CVDs. These are a reflection of the major forces driving social, economic and cultural change – globalization, urbanization and population ageing. Other determinants of CVDs include poverty, stress and hereditary factors. In addition, drug treatment of hypertension, diabetes and high blood lipids are necessary to reduce cardiovascular risk and prevent heart attacks and strokes among people with these conditions. Often, there are no symptoms of the underlying disease of the blood vessels. A heart attack or stroke may be the first sign of underlying disease. Symptoms of a heart attack include:
In addition the person may experience difficulty in breathing or shortness of breath; nausea or vomiting; light-headedness or faintness; a cold sweat; and turning pale. Women are more likely than men to have shortness of breath, nausea, vomiting, and back or jaw pain.
The most common symptom of a stroke is sudden weakness of the face, arm, or leg, most often on one side of the body. Other symptoms include sudden onset of:
People experiencing these symptoms should seek medical care immediately.
Rheumatic heart disease is caused by damage to the heart valves and heart muscle from the inflammation and scarring caused by rheumatic fever. Rheumatic fever is caused by an abnormal response of the body to infection with streptococcal bacteria, which usually begins as a sore throat or tonsillitis in children.
Rheumatic fever mostly affects children in developing countries, especially where poverty is widespread. Globally, about 2% of deaths from cardiovascular diseases are related to rheumatic heart disease.
Symptoms of rheumatic heart disease include: shortness of breath, fatigue, irregular heartbeats, chest pain and fainting.
Symptoms of rheumatic fever include: fever, pain and swelling of the joints, nausea, stomach cramps and vomiting.
At least three-quarters of the world's deaths from CVDs occur in low- and middle-income countries. People living in low- and middle-income countries often do not have the benefit of primary health care programmes for early detection and treatment of people with risk factors for CVDs. People in low- and middle-income countries who suffer from CVDs and other noncommunicable diseases have less access to effective and equitable health care services which respond to their needs. As a result, for many people in these countries detection is often late in the course of the disease and people die at a younger age from CVDs and other noncommunicable diseases, often in their most productive years.
The poorest people in low- and middle-income countries are most affected. At the household level, evidence is emerging that CVDs and other noncommunicable diseases contribute to poverty due to catastrophic health spending and high out-of-pocket expenditure. At the macro-economic level, CVDs place a heavy burden on the economies of low- and middle-income countries.
The key to cardiovascular disease reduction lies in the inclusion of cardiovascular disease management interventions in universal health coverage packages, although in a high number of countries health systems require significant investment and reorientation to effectively manage CVDs.
Evidence from 18 countries has shown that hypertension programmes can be implemented efficiently and cost-effectively at the primary care level which will ultimately result in reduced coronary heart disease and stroke. Patients with cardiovascular disease should have access to appropriate technology and medication. Basic medicines that should be available include: An acute event such as a heart attack or stroke should be promptly managed. Sometimes, surgical operations are required to treat CVDs. They include:
Medical devices are required to treat some CVDs. Such devices include pacemakers, prosthetic valves, and patches for closing holes in the heart.
In 2013, WHO Member States agreed on global mechanisms to reduce the avoidable NCD burden including a "Global action plan for the prevention and control of NCDs 2013-2020". This Plan aims to reduce the number of premature deaths from NCDs by 25% by 2025 through nine voluntary global targets. Two of the targets directly focus on preventing and controlling CVDs.
Target 6: Reduce global prevalence of raised blood pressure by 25% between 2010 and 2025.
Target 8: At least 50% of eligible people should receive drug therapy and counselling to prevent heart attacks and strokes by 2025.
In addition, target 9 states that there should be 80% availability of the affordable basic technologies and essential medicines, including generics, required to treat major NCDs in both public and private facilities. Achieving these targets will require significant investment in and strengthening of health systems. WHO is currently working on increasing the normative guidance available for the management of acute coronary syndrome and stroke which will provide guidance in these important areas.
Related
Related links
News
Fact sheets

========================================
cervical-cancer
========================================
Key factsCervical cancer is the fourth most common cancer in women globally with around 660 000 new cases and around 350 000 deaths in 2022. The highest rates of cervical cancer incidence and mortality are in low- and middle-income countries. This reflects major inequities driven by lack of access to national HPV vaccination, cervical screening and treatment services and social and economic determinants.Cervical cancer is caused by persistent infection with the human papillomavirus . Women living with HIV are 6 times more likely to develop cervical cancer compared to women without HIV.Prophylactic vaccination against HPV and screening and treatment of pre-cancer lesions are effective strategies to prevent cervical cancer and are very cost-effective. Cervical cancer can be cured if diagnosed at an early stage and treated promptly.Countries around the world are working to accelerate the elimination of cervical cancer in the coming decades, with an agreed set of three targets to be met by 2030. OverviewGlobally, cervical cancer is the fourth most common cancer in women, with around 660 000 new cases in 2022. In the same year, about 94% of the 350 000 deaths caused by cervical cancer occurred in low- and middle-income countries. The highest rates of cervical cancer incidence and mortality are in sub-Saharan Africa , Central America and South-East Asia. Regional differences in the cervical cancer burden are related to inequalities in access to vaccination, screening and treatment services, risk factors including HIV prevalence, and social and economic determinants such as sex, gender biases and poverty. Women living with HIV are 6 times more likely to develop cervical cancer compared to the general population, and an estimated 5% of all cervical cancer cases are attributable to HIV (1). Cervical cancer disproportionately affects younger women, and as a result, 20% of children who lose their mother to cancer do so due to cervical cancer (2).CausesHuman papillomavirus is a common sexually transmitted infection which can affect the skin, genital area and throat. Almost all sexually active people will be infected at some point in their lives, usually without symptoms. In most cases the immune system clears HPV from the body. Persistent infection with high-risk HPV can cause abnormal cells to develop, which go on to become cancer.Persistent HPV infection of the cervix if left untreated, causes 95% of cervical cancers. Typically, it takes 15–20 years for abnormal cells to become cancer, but in women with weakened immune systems, such as untreated HIV, this process can be faster and take 5–10 years. Risk factors for cancer progression include the grade of oncogenicity of the HPV type, immune status, the presence of other sexually transmitted infections, number of births, young age at first pregnancy, hormonal contraceptive use, and smoking. PreventionBoosting public awareness, access to information and services are key to prevention and control across the life course.Being vaccinated at age 9–14 years is a highly effective way to prevent HPV infection, cervical cancer and other HPV-related cancers.Screening from the age of 30 can detect cervical disease, which when treated, also prevents cervical cancer. At any age with symptoms or concerns, early detection followed by prompt quality treatment can cure cervical cancer.HPV vaccination and other prevention steps As of 2023, there are 6 HPV vaccines available globally. All protect against the high-risk HPV types 16 and 18, which cause most cervical cancers and have been shown to be safe and effective in preventing HPV infection and cervical cancer. As a priority, HPV vaccines should be given to all girls aged 9–14 years, before they become sexually active. The vaccine may be given as 1 or 2 doses. People with reduced immune systems should ideally receive 2 or 3 doses. Some countries have also chosen to vaccinate boys to further reduce the prevalence of HPV in the community and to prevent cancers in men caused by HPV.Other important ways to prevent HPV infection include:being a non-smoker or stopping smoking using condomsvoluntary male circumcision. Cervical screening and treatment of precancersWomen should be screened for cervical cancer every 5–10 years starting at age 30. Women living with HIV should be screened every 3 years starting at age 25. The global strategy encourages a minimum of two lifetime screens with a high-performance HPV test by age 35 and again by age 45 years. Precancers rarely cause symptoms, which is why regular cervical cancer screening is important, even if you have been vaccinated against HPV.Self-collection of a sample for HPV testing, which may be a preferred choice for women, has been shown to be as reliable as samples collected by healthcare providers. After a positive HPV test a healthcare provider can look for changes on the cervix which may develop into cervical cancer if left untreated. Treatment of precancers is a simple procedure and prevents cervical cancer. Treatment may be offered in the same visit or after a second test , which is especially recommended for women living with HIV.Treatments of precancers are quick and generally painless causing infrequent complications. Treatment steps include colposcopy or visual inspection of the cervix to locate and assess the lesion followed by:thermal ablation, which involves using a heated probe to burn off cells; cryotherapy, which involves using a cold probe to freeze off the cells;LEETZ , which involves removing your abnormal tissues with an electrically heated loop; and/or a cone biopsy, which involves using a knife to remove a cone-shaped wedge of tissue.Early detection, diagnosis and treatment of cervical cancerCervical cancer can be cured if diagnosed and treated at an early stage of disease. Recognizing symptoms and seeking medical advice to address any concerns is a critical step. Women should see a healthcare professional if they notice:unusual bleeding between periods, after menopause, or after sexual intercourseincreased or foul-smelling vaginal dischargesymptoms like persistent pain in the back, legs, or pelvisweight loss, fatigue and loss of appetite vaginal discomfortswelling in the legs.Clinical evaluations and tests to confirm a diagnosis are important and will generally be followed by referral for treatment services, which can include surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy as well as palliative care to provide supportive care and pain management.Management pathways for invasive cancer care are important tools to ensure that a patient is referred promptly and supported as they navigate the steps to diagnosis and treatment decisions. Features of quality care include:a multidisciplinary team ensuring diagnosis and staging takes place prior to treatment decisions;treatment decisions in line with national guidelines; andinterventions are supported by holistic psychological, spiritual, physical and palliative care. As low- and middle-income countries scale-up cervical screening, more cases of invasive cervical cancer will be detected, especially in previously unscreened populations. Therefore, referral and cancer management strategies need to be implemented and expanded alongside prevention services. WHO ResponseAll countries have made a commitment to eliminate cervical cancer as a public health problem. The WHO Global strategy defines elimination as reducing the number of new cases annually to 4 or fewer per 100 000 women and sets three targets to be achieved by the year 2030 to put all countries on the pathway to elimination in the coming decades:90% of girls vaccinated with the HPV vaccine by age 1570% of women screened with a high-quality test by ages 35 and 4590% of women with cervical disease receiving treatment.Modelling estimates that a cumulative 74 million new cases of cervical cancer can be averted, and 62 million deaths can be avoided by by 2120 by reaching this elimination goal. Explore the cervical cancer knowledge repository for resources from WHO, UN agencies and other partners: Cervical cancer elimination initiative.Prevention of HPV-associated precancer and cancer is also a key element of WHO’s Global health sector strategy on HIV, hepatitis and sexually transmitted infections 2022–2030, and the World Health Assembly resolution WHA74.5 on oral health includes actions on mouth and throat cancers. ReferencesStelze, Dominik et al. Estimates of the global burden of cervical cancer associated with HIV. The Lancet. 2020. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2214-109X(20)30459-9Guida, F., Kidman, R., Ferlay, J. et al. Global and regional estimates of orphans attributed to maternal cancer mortality in 2020. Nat Med 28, 2563–2572 . https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-022-02109-2
Globally, cervical cancer is the fourth most common cancer in women, with around 660 000 new cases in 2022. In the same year, about 94% of the 350 000 deaths caused by cervical cancer occurred in low- and middle-income countries. The highest rates of cervical cancer incidence and mortality are in sub-Saharan Africa , Central America and South-East Asia. Regional differences in the cervical cancer burden are related to inequalities in access to vaccination, screening and treatment services, risk factors including HIV prevalence, and social and economic determinants such as sex, gender biases and poverty. Women living with HIV are 6 times more likely to develop cervical cancer compared to the general population, and an estimated 5% of all cervical cancer cases are attributable to HIV (1). Cervical cancer disproportionately affects younger women, and as a result, 20% of children who lose their mother to cancer do so due to cervical cancer (2).
Human papillomavirus is a common sexually transmitted infection which can affect the skin, genital area and throat. Almost all sexually active people will be infected at some point in their lives, usually without symptoms. In most cases the immune system clears HPV from the body. Persistent infection with high-risk HPV can cause abnormal cells to develop, which go on to become cancer.
Persistent HPV infection of the cervix if left untreated, causes 95% of cervical cancers. Typically, it takes 15–20 years for abnormal cells to become cancer, but in women with weakened immune systems, such as untreated HIV, this process can be faster and take 5–10 years. Risk factors for cancer progression include the grade of oncogenicity of the HPV type, immune status, the presence of other sexually transmitted infections, number of births, young age at first pregnancy, hormonal contraceptive use, and smoking. Boosting public awareness, access to information and services are key to prevention and control across the life course.
As a priority, HPV vaccines should be given to all girls aged 9–14 years, before they become sexually active. The vaccine may be given as 1 or 2 doses. People with reduced immune systems should ideally receive 2 or 3 doses. Some countries have also chosen to vaccinate boys to further reduce the prevalence of HPV in the community and to prevent cancers in men caused by HPV.
Other important ways to prevent HPV infection include:
Women should be screened for cervical cancer every 5–10 years starting at age 30. Women living with HIV should be screened every 3 years starting at age 25. The global strategy encourages a minimum of two lifetime screens with a high-performance HPV test by age 35 and again by age 45 years. Precancers rarely cause symptoms, which is why regular cervical cancer screening is important, even if you have been vaccinated against HPV.
Self-collection of a sample for HPV testing, which may be a preferred choice for women, has been shown to be as reliable as samples collected by healthcare providers. After a positive HPV test a healthcare provider can look for changes on the cervix which may develop into cervical cancer if left untreated. Treatment of precancers is a simple procedure and prevents cervical cancer. Treatment may be offered in the same visit or after a second test , which is especially recommended for women living with HIV.
Treatments of precancers are quick and generally painless causing infrequent complications. Treatment steps include colposcopy or visual inspection of the cervix to locate and assess the lesion followed by:
Cervical cancer can be cured if diagnosed and treated at an early stage of disease. Recognizing symptoms and seeking medical advice to address any concerns is a critical step. Women should see a healthcare professional if they notice:
Clinical evaluations and tests to confirm a diagnosis are important and will generally be followed by referral for treatment services, which can include surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy as well as palliative care to provide supportive care and pain management.
Management pathways for invasive cancer care are important tools to ensure that a patient is referred promptly and supported as they navigate the steps to diagnosis and treatment decisions. Features of quality care include:
As low- and middle-income countries scale-up cervical screening, more cases of invasive cervical cancer will be detected, especially in previously unscreened populations. Therefore, referral and cancer management strategies need to be implemented and expanded alongside prevention services. All countries have made a commitment to eliminate cervical cancer as a public health problem. The WHO Global strategy defines elimination as reducing the number of new cases annually to 4 or fewer per 100 000 women and sets three targets to be achieved by the year 2030 to put all countries on the pathway to elimination in the coming decades:
Modelling estimates that a cumulative 74 million new cases of cervical cancer can be averted, and 62 million deaths can be avoided by by 2120 by reaching this elimination goal. Explore the cervical cancer knowledge repository for resources from WHO, UN agencies and other partners: Cervical cancer elimination initiative.
Prevention of HPV-associated precancer and cancer is also a key element of WHO’s Global health sector strategy on HIV, hepatitis and sexually transmitted infections 2022–2030, and the World Health Assembly resolution WHA74.5 on oral health includes actions on mouth and throat cancers. References
Related
News
Fact sheets
Feature stories
More
&amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;nbsp;Global Cancer ObservatoryGlobal and regional estimates of orphans attributed to maternal cancer mortality in 2020Estimates of the global burden of cervical cancer associated with HIVHPV vaccination and the risk of invasive cervical cancerMortality impact of achieving WHO cervical cancer elimination targets: a comparative modelling analysis in 78 low-income and lower-middle-income countries Impact of HPV vaccination and cervical screening on cervical cancer elimination: a comparative modelling analysis in 78 low-income and lower-middle-income countriesEssential Package of Palliative Care for Women With Cervical Cancer: Responding to the Suffering of a Highly Vulnerable Population &amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;nbsp;Global Cancer ObservatoryGlobal and regional estimates of orphans attributed to maternal cancer mortality in 2020Estimates of the global burden of cervical cancer associated with HIVHPV vaccination and the risk of invasive cervical cancerMortality impact of achieving WHO cervical cancer elimination targets: a comparative modelling analysis in 78 low-income and lower-middle-income countries Impact of HPV vaccination and cervical screening on cervical cancer elimination: a comparative modelling analysis in 78 low-income and lower-middle-income countriesEssential Package of Palliative Care for Women With Cervical Cancer: Responding to the Suffering of a Highly Vulnerable Population &amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;nbsp;

========================================
chagas-disease-(american-trypanosomiasis)
========================================
Key facts
Chagas disease is caused by the infection of a protozoan parasite . However, this condition is the result of a complex health problem typical of neglected tropical diseases and socially determined diseases. A missed or late diagnosis with absent or incomplete treatment and follow-up can transform this infection into a life-threatening condition.
More than 7 million people worldwide are estimated to be infected with T. cruzi, leading to more than 10 000 deaths every year. Although a condition of increasing global presence, Chagas disease is found mainly in endemic areas of 21 continental Latin American countries (1), where transmission is largely related to the presence of the insect vector. Today, more than 100 million people are considered at risk of infection.
Chagas disease is named after Carlos Chagas, a Brazilian physician and researcher who on 14 April 1909 diagnosed the disease in a person for the first time. Today, 14 April marks World Chagas Disease Day.
Chagas disease was once entirely confined to continental rural areas of the Americas. Due to socioenvironmental changes and increased population mobility, most infected people now live in urban settings and the infection has been detected in 44 countries (including Canada, the United States of America, and many European and some Western Pacific, African and Eastern Mediterranean countries).
In Latin America, T. cruzi parasites are mainly transmitted by contact with faeces/urine of infected blood-sucking triatomine bugs. These bugs typically live in the wall or roof cracks of homes and surrounding structures, such as chicken coops, pens and warehouses, in rural or suburban areas. Normally they hide during the day and become active at night when they feed on animal and human blood. They usually bite an exposed area of skin such as the face, and defecate or urinate close to the bite. The parasites enter the body when the person instinctively smears the bug’s faeces or urine into the bite, other skin breaks, the eyes or the mouth. T. cruzi can also infect animals; common opossums are considered one of the most important wild reservoirs of infection.
T. cruzi can also be transmitted:
Chagas disease presents in two phases. The initial acute phase lasts for about two months after infection. Although a high number of parasites can circulate in the blood, in most cases symptoms are absent or mild and non-specific (fever, headache, enlarged lymph glands, pallor, muscle pain, difficulty in breathing, swelling, and abdominal or chest pain). Much less frequently, people bitten by a triatomine bug show characteristic first visible signs, which can be either a skin lesion or a purplish swelling of the lids of one eye .
During the chronic phase, the parasites are hidden mainly in the heart and digestive muscles. One to three decades after infection, up to a third of patients suffer from cardiac disorders and up to 1 in 10 suffer from digestive , neurological or mixed alterations. In later years these patients may experience the damage to the nervous system and muscles of the heart and digestive system, leading to cardiac arrhythmias, progressive heart failure, and sudden death, among other clinical manifestations and complications.
Chagas disease can be treated with benznidazole or nifurtimox. Both medicines kill the parasite and are fully effective in curing the disease if given early, in the acute phase, including in case of congenital transmission. Their efficacy diminishes, however, the longer a person has been infected; also, adverse reactions are more frequent and potentially severe in older age. Treatment is also indicated for patients in whom infection has been reactivated , and during the early chronic phase, including for girls and women of childbearing age to prevent congenital transmission.
Adults with infection, especially those with no symptoms, should be offered treatment because antiparasitic medicines can also prevent or curb disease progression. In other cases, the potential benefits in preventing or delaying the development of Chagas disease should be weighed against the duration of treatment and possible adverse reactions . Benznidazole and nifurtimox should not be administered to pregnant women or people with kidney or liver failure. Nifurtimox is also contraindicated for people with a background of neurological or psychiatric disorders. Additionally, life-lasting follow up and specific treatment for cardiac, digestive or neurological manifestations are usually required.
The large number of triatomine bug species and wild animals infected with T. cruzi throughout the Americas mean that the infection cannot be eradicated. Instead, the public health targets are elimination of the transmission to humans, early health-care access and life-long follow up of the infected people.
There is no vaccine to prevent Chagas disease. Vector control, reducing interaction between humans and vector insects, has been the most effective method of prevention in Latin America. Blood screening is necessary to prevent infection through transfusion, organ transplantation, and congenital transmission, and to increase detection and care of the affected population all over the world.
Depending on the geographical area, WHO recommends the following approaches to prevention and control:
The medical care cost of patients with chronic cardiac, digestive, neurologic or mixed forms of the disease has been calculated to be >80% higher than the cost of spraying residual insecticide to control vectors and prevent infection.
All health professionals, beginning at the first level of care , and appropriately trained and updated, have a crucial role in enhancing the detection, treatment, follow-up, and notification of cases. Assessment of the available diagnostics and the most cost-effective algorithms is fundamental to increase early case detection. Innovation, research and development, and evaluation of new diagnostics and medicines can accelerate the path towards the elimination of the disease as a public health problem. Promotion of biomedical, psychosocial and environmental studies focused on the determinants and risk factors of Chagas disease is essential to identify novel approaches for prevention and control. National information systems are essential to monitor the number of acute and chronic cases and the active transmission routes. However, they are only in place in 6 out of the 44 countries that have reported cases so far.
Since the 1990s there have been successful intergovernmental initiatives in the Americas, leading to a substantial reduction in transmission and increased access to diagnosis and antiparasitic treatment for Chagas disease. The risk of T. cruzi transmission by transfusion has decreased sharply following the universal screening in all blood banks of continental Latin American countries, and progressively in other countries and continents. WHO recognized Chagas disease as a neglected tropical disease in 2005. This facilitated its greater recognition as a global public health problem and was instrumental to strengthen prevention, early diagnosis and antiparasitic treatment, comprehensive care, psychosocial follow up, as well as information, education and communication activities. It also promoted the fight against misinformation, the lack of social demand and the weak political commitment to face the burden of disease. In May 2019, the 72nd World Health Assembly established World Chagas Disease Day, to be celebrated annually on 14 April. The NTD road map 2021–2030 includes Chagas disease among the conditions targeted for elimination as a public health problem and proposes five targets:
To attain the goal of elimination of Chagas disease transmission to humans and provide health care for affected people worldwide, WHO aims to strengthen networking at the global level and reinforcing regional and national capacities.
Notes
Related
News
Fact sheets

========================================
chikungunya
========================================
Chikungunya is a mosquito-borne viral disease caused by the chikungunya virus , an RNA virus in the alphavirus genus of the family Togaviridae. The name chikungunya derives from a word in the Kimakonde language of southern Tanzania, meaning “that which bends up” and describes the contorted posture of infected people with severe joint pain.
CHIKV was first identified in the United Republic of Tanzania in 1952 and subsequently in other countries Africa and Asia (1). Urban outbreaks were first recorded in Thailand in 1967 and in India in the 1970s (2). Since 2004, outbreaks of CHIKV have become more frequent and widespread, caused partly due to viral adaptations allowing the virus to be spread more easily by Aedes albopictus mosquitoes and because CHIKV has been introduced into immunologically naïve populations. CHIKV has now been identified in >110 countries in Asia, Africa, Europe and the Americas. Transmission has been interrupted for several years on islands where a high proportion of the population is infected and then immune; however, transmission often persists in countries where large parts of the population have not yet been infected.
All regions with established populations of Aedes aegypti or Aedes albopictus mosquitoes have now experienced local mosquito-borne transmission.
Chikungunya virus is transmitted by infected female mosquitoes, most commonly Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus, which can also transmit dengue and Zika viruses. These mosquitoes bite primarily during daylight hours and Aedes aegypti feeds both indoors and outdoors. They lay eggs in containers with standing water. Both species feed outdoors, and Ae. aegypti also feeds indoors.
When an uninfected mosquito feeds on a person who has CHIKV circulating in their blood, the mosquito can ingest the virus. The virus then replicates in the mosquito over several days, enters its salivary glands, and can be transmitted into a new human host when the mosquito bites them. The virus again begins to replicate in this newly infected person and reaches high concentrations in their blood, at which point they can further infect other mosquitoes and perpetuate the transmission cycle.
In symptomatic patients, CHIKV disease onset is typically 4–8 days after the bite of an infected mosquito. It is characterized by an abrupt onset of fever, frequently accompanied by severe joint pain. The joint pain is often debilitating and usually lasts for a few days but may be prolonged, lasting for weeks, months or even years. Other common signs and symptoms include joint swelling, muscle pain, headache, nausea, fatigue and rash. Since these symptoms overlap with other infections, including those with dengue and Zika viruses, cases can be misdiagnosed. In the absence of significant joint pain, symptoms in infected individuals are usually mild and the infection may go unrecognized.
Most patients recover fully from the infection; however, occasional cases of eye, heart, and neurological complications have been reported with CHIKV infections. Patients at extremes of the age spectrum are at higher risk for severe disease including newborns infected during delivery to infected mothers or bitten by infected mosquitoes in the weeks after birth, and older people with underlying medical conditions. Patients with severe disease require hospitalization because of the risk of organ damage and death.
Once an individual is recovered, available evidence suggests they are likely to be immune from future chikungunya infections (4).
Chikungunya virus may be detected directly in blood samples collected during the first week of illness using tests such as reverse transcriptase–polymerase chain reaction .
Other tests can detect a person’s immune response to chikungunya virus infection. These are typically used after the first week of infection to test for antibodies to the virus. The antibody levels are typically detectable by the first week after illness onset and can still be detected for about 2 months. The clinical management includes addressing fever and joint pain with anti-pyretics and optimal analgesics, drinking plenty of fluids and general rest. There is no specific antiviral drug treatment for CHIKV infections.
Paracetamol or acetaminophen are recommended for pain relief and reducing fever until dengue infections are ruled out, as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs can increase the risk of bleeding.
There are currently two chikungunya vaccines that have received regulatory approvals and/or have been recommended for use in populations at risk in several countries, but the vaccines are not yet widely available nor in widespread use. WHO and external expert advisors are reviewing vaccine trial and post-marketing data in the context of global chikungunya epidemiology to inform possible recommendations for use. Avoidance of mosquito bites offers the best protection against CHIKV infection. Patients suspected of having CHIKV infection should avoid getting mosquito bites during the first week of illness to prevent further transmission to mosquitoes, that may in turn infect other people. The main method to reduce transmission of CHIKV is through control of the mosquito vectors and reduction of mosquito breeding sites. This requires mobilization of communities, who are critical in reducing mosquito breeding sites through emptying and cleaning containers that contain water on a weekly basis, disposing of waste, and supporting local mosquito control programmes.
During outbreaks, insecticides may be sprayed to kill flying adult mosquitoes, applied to surfaces in and around containers where the mosquitoes land, and used to treat water in containers to kill the immature mosquito larvae. This may also be performed by health authorities as an emergency measure to control the mosquito population.
People living in or visiting areas with CHIKV transmission are advised to wear clothing that minimizes skin exposure to the day-biting mosquitoes. Window and door screens should be used to prevent mosquitoes from entering homes. Repellents can be applied to exposed skin or to clothing in strict accordance with product label instructions. Repellents should contain DEET, IR3535 or icaridin. Insecticide-treated mosquito nets should be used against day-biting mosquitoes by persons who sleep during the daytime, for example young children, sick patients or older people.
WHO supports countries to conduct surveillance and control of arboviruses through the implementation of the Global Arbovirus Initiative.
WHO responds to chikungunya in the following ways:
WHO encourages countries to develop and maintain the capacity to detect and confirm cases, manage patients and implement social communication strategies to reduce the presence of the mosquito vectors.
References Related
News
Fact sheets
Feature stories
More
Second WHO model list of essential in vitro diagnostics Second WHO model list of essential in vitro diagnostics

========================================
child-maltreatment
========================================
Child maltreatment is the abuse and neglect that occurs to children under 18 years of age. It includes all types of physical and/or emotional ill-treatment, sexual abuse, neglect, negligence and commercial or other exploitation, which results in actual or potential harm to the child’s health, survival, development or dignity in the context of a relationship of responsibility, trust or power.
Child maltreatment is a global problem with serious life-long consequences. In spite of recent national surveys in several low- and middle-income countries, data from many countries are still lacking.
Child maltreatment is complex and difficult to study. Current estimates vary widely depending on the country and the method of research used. Estimates depend on:
Nonetheless, international studies reveal that 6 in 10 children under 5 years of age regularly suffer physical punishment and/or psychological violence at the hands of parents and caregivers, and 1 in 5 women and 1 in 7 men report having been sexually abused as a child.
Every year, there are an estimated 40 150 homicide deaths in children under 18 years of age, some of which are likely due to child maltreatment. This number almost certainly underestimates the true extent of the problem, since a significant proportion of deaths due to child maltreatment are incorrectly attributed to falls, burns, drowning and other causes.
In armed conflict and refugee settings, girls are particularly vulnerable to sexual violence, exploitation and abuse by combatants, security forces, members of their communities, aid workers and others.
Child maltreatment has often severe short- and long-term physical, sexual and mental health consequences. These include injuries, including head injuries and severe disability , post-traumatic stress, anxiety, depression, and sexually transmitted infections including HIV. Adolescent girls may face additional health issues, including gynaecological disorders and unwanted pregnancy. Child maltreatment can affect cognitive and academic performance and is strongly associated with alcohol and drug abuse and smoking – key risk factors for noncommunicable diseases such as cardiovascular diseases and cancer.
Maltreatment causes stress that is associated with disruption in early brain development. Extreme stress can impair the development of the nervous and immune systems. Consequently, as adults, maltreated children are at increased risk for behavioural, physical and mental health problems such as:
Violence against children is also a contributor to inequalities in education. Children who experienced any form of violence in childhood have a 13% greater likelihood of not graduating from school.
Beyond the health, social and educational consequences of child maltreatment, there is an economic impact, including costs of hospitalization, mental health treatment, child welfare, and longer-term health costs.
Several risk factors for child maltreatment have been identified. Not all risk factors are present in all social and cultural contexts, and the list here provides an overview when attempting to understand the causes of child maltreatment.
It is important to emphasize that children are the victims and are never to blame for maltreatment. Characteristics of an individual child that may increase the likelihood of being maltreated include:
Characteristics of a parent or caregiver that may increase the risk of child maltreatment include:
Characteristics of the relationships within families or among intimate partners, friends and peers that may increase the risk of child maltreatment include:
Characteristics of communities and societies that may increase the risk of child maltreatment include:
Preventing and responding to child maltreatment requires a multisectoral approach.
The earlier such interventions occur in children's lives, the greater the benefits to the child and to society .
Effective and promising interventions include:
To maximize the effects of prevention and care, WHO recommends that interventions are delivered as part of a four-step public health approach:
WHO, in collaboration with partners:
Related
Fact sheets

========================================
child-mortality-under-5-years
========================================
Substantial global progress has been made in reducing childhood mortality since 1990. The total number of under-5 deaths worldwide has declined from 12.6 million in 1990 to 5 million in 2020. Since 1990, the global under-5 mortality rate has dropped by 60%, from 93 deaths per 1000 live births in 1990 to 37 in 2020. This is equivalent to 1 in 11 children dying before reaching age 5 in 1990, compared to 1 in 27 in 2020.
While the global under-5 mortality rate fell to 37 deaths per 1000 live births in 2020, children in sub-Saharan Africa continued to have the highest rates of mortality in the world at 74 deaths per 1000 live births- 14 times higher than the risk for children in Europe and North America. Sub-Saharan Africa and southern Asia, account for more than 80% of the 5 million under-5 deaths in 2020, while they only account for 53% of the global live births. Half of all under-5 deaths in 2020 occurred in just 5 countries: Nigeria, India, Pakistan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Ethiopia. Nigeria and India alone account for almost a third of all deaths.
At the country level, under-5 mortality rates in 2020 ranged from 2 deaths per 1000 live births to 115 deaths per 1000 live births, and the risk of dying before turning 5 for a child born in the highest-mortality country was about 65 times higher than in the lowest-mortality country. Globally, infectious diseases, including pneumonia, diarrhoea and malaria, along with pre-term birth complications, birth asphyxia and trauma and congenital anomalies remain the leading causes of death for children under 5 years. Access to basic lifesaving interventions such as skilled delivery at birth, postnatal care, breastfeeding and adequate nutrition, vaccinations and treatment for common childhood diseases can save many young lives. Malnourished children, particularly those with severe acute malnutrition, have a higher risk of death from common childhood illness such as diarrhoea, pneumonia and malaria. Nutrition-related factors contribute to about 45% of deaths in children under 5 years of age.
The evidence on deaths directly attributable to COVID-19 infection is strongly age-dependent, with children and adolescents least affected. Children under 5 years represent approximately 2% of the global cases and 0.1% of the global deaths (1).
Data from civil registration and vital statistic systems , health management information systems from 80 countries as well as specific country-wide monitoring systems indicate no significant deviation from expected mortality for this age group for 2020 and in some cases indicate fewer deaths than would be expected from historical data. As more data comes in from countries, and further analyses are performed, these results may change for 2021.
The Sustainable Development Goals , adopted by the United Nations in 2015, were developed to promote healthy lives and well-being for all children. The SDG Goal 3.2.1 is to end preventable deaths of newborns and under-5 children by 2030. There are two targets:
Target 3.2.1 is closely linked with target 3.1.1, to reduce the global maternal mortality ratio to less than 70 deaths per 100 000 live births, and target 2.2.1 on ending all forms of malnutrition, as malnutrition is a frequent contributing cause of death for under-5 children. These have been translated into the new Global strategy for women’s, children’s and adolescent’s health. Member States need to set their own targets and develop specific strategies to reduce child mortality and monitor their progress.
In 2020, 125 countries have already met the SDG target for under-5 mortality and a further 16 countries are expected to meet the target by 2030 if current trends continue. However, accelerated progress will be needed in 54 countries, which will not achieve the target by 2030 on current trends. Thirty-five of these countries will need to double their current rate of reduction without considering the additional challenges brought about by the COVID-19 pandemic. Meeting the SDG target in the 54 off-track countries would reduce the number of under-5 deaths by 8 million between 2021 and 2030, reducing the number of under-5 deaths to 2.5 million in 2030. Focused efforts are still needed in sub-Saharan Africa and southern Asia, including in fragile and conflict-affected situations.
WHO calls on Member States to address health equity through universal health coverage so that all children can access essential health services without undue financial hardship. Moving from business as usual to innovative, multiple and tailored approaches to increase access, coverage and quality of child health services will require strategic direction and an optimal mix of community and facility-based care. Health sector and multisectoral efforts are also needed to overcome inequalities and any negative effects of social determinants of health.
----------------------------------------

========================================
cancer-in-children
========================================
Key factsEach year, an estimated 400 000 children and adolescents of 0–19 years old develop cancer (1).The most common types of childhood cancer include leukemias, brain tumours, lymphomas, and solid tumours such as neuroblastoma and Wilms tumour.In high-income countries, where comprehensive services are generally accessible, more than 80% of children with cancer are cured. In low- and middle-income countries , less than 30% are cured (2).Avoidable deaths from childhood cancers in LMICs result from lack of diagnosis, misdiagnosis or delayed diagnosis, obstacles to accessing care, abandonment of treatment, death from toxicity and relapse (2).Only 29% of low-income countries report that cancer medicines are generally available to their populations compared to 96% of high-income countries.OverviewCancer is a leading cause of death for children and adolescents. The likelihood of surviving a diagnosis of childhood cancer depends on the country in which the child lives; in high-income countries, more than 80% of children with cancer are cured, but in many LMICs less than 30% are cured (2).Although childhood cancer cannot generally be prevented or identified through screening, most types of childhood cancer can be cured with generic medicines and other forms of treatment, including surgery and radiotherapy.The reasons for lower survival rates in LMICs include delay in diagnosis, an inability to obtain an accurate diagnosis, inaccessible therapy, abandonment of treatment, death from toxicity and avoidable relapse. Improving access to childhood cancer care, including to essential medicines and technologies, is highly cost-effective, feasible and can improve survival in all income settings.Childhood cancer data systems are needed to drive continuous improvements in the quality of care, and to inform policy decisions.CausesCancer occurs in people of all ages and can affect any part of the body. It begins with genetic change in single cells, that can then grow into a mass , invade other parts of the body and cause harm and death if left untreated. Unlike cancer in adults, most childhood cancers do not have a known cause. Many studies have sought to identify the causes of childhood cancer, but very few cancers in children are caused by environmental or lifestyle factors. Cancer prevention efforts in children should focus on behaviours that will prevent the child from developing preventable cancer as an adult.Some chronic infections, such as HIV, Epstein-Barr virus and malaria, are risk factors for childhood cancer. They are particularly relevant in LMICs. Other infections can increase a child’s risk of developing cancer as an adult, so it is important to be vaccinated (against hepatitis B to help prevent liver cancer and against human papillomavirus to help prevent cervical cancer) and to other pursue other methods such as early detection and treatment of chronic infections that can lead to cancer.Current data suggest that approximately 10% of all children with cancer have a predisposition because of genetic factors (3). Further research is needed to identify factors impacting cancer development in children.Improving outcomes of childhood cancerBecause it is generally not possible to prevent cancer in children, the most effective strategy to reduce the burden of cancer in children and improve outcomes is to focus on a prompt, correct diagnosis followed by effective, evidence-based therapy with tailored supportive care.Early diagnosisWhen identified early, cancer is more likely to respond to effective treatment and result in a greater probability of survival, less suffering, and often less expensive and less intensive treatment. Significant improvements can be made in the lives of children with cancer by detecting cancer early and avoiding delays in care. A correct diagnosis is essential to treat children with cancer because each cancer requires a specific treatment regimen that may include surgery, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy. Early diagnosis consists of 3 components:awareness of symptoms by families and primary care providers;accurate and timely clinical evaluation, diagnosis, and staging ; andaccess to prompt treatment.Early diagnosis is relevant in all settings and improves survival for many cancers. Programmes to promote early and correct diagnosis have been successfully implemented in countries of all income levels, often through the collaborative efforts of governments, civil society and nongovernmental organizations, with vital roles played by parent groups. Childhood cancer is associated with a range of warning symptoms, such as fever, severe and persistent headaches, bone pain and weight loss, that can be detected by families and by trained primary health-care providers.Screening is generally not helpful for childhood cancers. In some select cases, it can be considered in high-risk populations. For example, some eye cancers in children can be caused by a mutation that is inherited, so if that mutation or disease is identified in the family of a child with retinoblastoma, genetic counselling can be offered and siblings monitored with regular eye examinations early in life. Genetic causes of childhood cancers are relevant in only a small proportion children with cancer. There is no high-quality evidence to support population-based screening programmes in children.TreatmentA correct diagnosis is essential to prescribe appropriate therapy for the type and extent of the disease. Standard therapies include chemotherapy, surgery and/or radiotherapy. Children also need special attention to their continued physical and cognitive growth and nutritional status, which requires a dedicated, multi-disciplinary team. Access to effective diagnosis, essential medicines, pathology, blood products, radiation therapy, technology and psychosocial and supportive care are variable and inequitable around the world. However, cure is possible for more than 80% of children with cancer when childhood cancer services are accessible. Pharmacological treatment, for example, includes inexpensive generic medications included on the WHO List of essential medicines for children. Children who complete treatment require ongoing care to monitor for cancer recurrence and to manage any possible long-term impact of treatment.Palliative carePalliative care relieves symptoms caused by cancer and improves the quality of life of patients and their families. Not all children with cancer can be cured, but relief of suffering is possible for everyone. Paediatric palliative care is considered a core component of comprehensive care, starting when the disease is diagnosed and continuing throughout treatment and care, regardless of whether a child receives treatment with curative intent.Palliative care programmes can be delivered through community and home-based care, providing pain relief and psychosocial support to patients and their families. Adequate access to oral morphine and other pain medicines should be provided for the treatment of moderate to severe cancer pain, which affects more than 80% of cancer patients in the terminal phase.WHO response In 2018, WHO launched, with the support of St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, the Global Initiative for Childhood Cancer , to provide leadership and technical assistance to governments to support them in building and sustaining high-quality childhood cancer programmes. The goal is to achieve at least 60% survival for all children with cancer by 2030. This represents an approximate doubling of the current cure rate and will save an additional 1 million lives over the next decade. The CureAll framework and its accompanying technical package have been developed to support implementation of the Initiative. The package helps governments and other stakeholders assess current capacity, set priorities, generate investment cases, develop evidence-based standards of care and monitor progress. An information-sharing portal has been created to facilitate sharing of expertise between countries and partners.The Global Initiative is part of the response to the World Health Assembly resolution Cancer Prevention and Control through an Integrated Approach , focused on the reduction of premature mortality from NCDs and the achievement of universal health coverage.In December 2021, WHO and St Jude Children’s Research Hospital launched the Global Platform for Access to Childhood Cancer Medicines , the first of its kind, to provide an uninterrupted supply of quality-assured childhood cancer medicines with end-to-end support from selecting to dispensing medicines according to best possible care standards. The Global Platform synergizes with the Global Initiative, with activities implemented through this new effort expected to contribute substantially to the achievement of the initiative’s goals.WHO and the International Agency for Research on Cancer collaborate with the International Atomic Energy Agency and other UN organizations and partners, to:increase political commitment for childhood cancer control;support governments to develop high-quality cancer centres and regional satellites to ensure early and accurate diagnosis and effective treatment;develop standards and tools to guide the planning and implementation of interventions for early diagnosis, treatment and palliative and survivorship care,improve access to essential medicines and technologies; andsupport governments to safeguard families of children with cancer from financial harm and social isolation as a result of cancer care.ReferencesSteliarova-Foucher E, Colombet M, Ries LAG, et al. International incidence of childhood cancer, 2001-10: a population-based registry study. Lancet Oncol. 2017;18(6):719-731.Lam CG, Howard SC, Bouffet E, Pritchard-Jones K. Science and health for all children with cancer. Science. 2019 Mar 15;363 :1182-1186. doi: 10.1126/science.aaw4892. PMID: 30872518.Zhang J, Walsh MF, Wu G, Edmonson MN, Gruber TA, et al. Germline Mutations in Predisposition Genes in Pediatric Cancer. N Engl J Med. 2015 Dec 10;373(24):2336-2346.
Cancer is a leading cause of death for children and adolescents. The likelihood of surviving a diagnosis of childhood cancer depends on the country in which the child lives; in high-income countries, more than 80% of children with cancer are cured, but in many LMICs less than 30% are cured (2).
Although childhood cancer cannot generally be prevented or identified through screening, most types of childhood cancer can be cured with generic medicines and other forms of treatment, including surgery and radiotherapy.
The reasons for lower survival rates in LMICs include delay in diagnosis, an inability to obtain an accurate diagnosis, inaccessible therapy, abandonment of treatment, death from toxicity and avoidable relapse. Improving access to childhood cancer care, including to essential medicines and technologies, is highly cost-effective, feasible and can improve survival in all income settings.
Childhood cancer data systems are needed to drive continuous improvements in the quality of care, and to inform policy decisions.
Cancer occurs in people of all ages and can affect any part of the body. It begins with genetic change in single cells, that can then grow into a mass , invade other parts of the body and cause harm and death if left untreated. Unlike cancer in adults, most childhood cancers do not have a known cause. Many studies have sought to identify the causes of childhood cancer, but very few cancers in children are caused by environmental or lifestyle factors. Cancer prevention efforts in children should focus on behaviours that will prevent the child from developing preventable cancer as an adult.
Some chronic infections, such as HIV, Epstein-Barr virus and malaria, are risk factors for childhood cancer. They are particularly relevant in LMICs. Other infections can increase a child’s risk of developing cancer as an adult, so it is important to be vaccinated (against hepatitis B to help prevent liver cancer and against human papillomavirus to help prevent cervical cancer) and to other pursue other methods such as early detection and treatment of chronic infections that can lead to cancer.
Current data suggest that approximately 10% of all children with cancer have a predisposition because of genetic factors (3). Further research is needed to identify factors impacting cancer development in children.
Because it is generally not possible to prevent cancer in children, the most effective strategy to reduce the burden of cancer in children and improve outcomes is to focus on a prompt, correct diagnosis followed by effective, evidence-based therapy with tailored supportive care.
When identified early, cancer is more likely to respond to effective treatment and result in a greater probability of survival, less suffering, and often less expensive and less intensive treatment. Significant improvements can be made in the lives of children with cancer by detecting cancer early and avoiding delays in care. A correct diagnosis is essential to treat children with cancer because each cancer requires a specific treatment regimen that may include surgery, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy. Early diagnosis consists of 3 components:
Early diagnosis is relevant in all settings and improves survival for many cancers. Programmes to promote early and correct diagnosis have been successfully implemented in countries of all income levels, often through the collaborative efforts of governments, civil society and nongovernmental organizations, with vital roles played by parent groups. Childhood cancer is associated with a range of warning symptoms, such as fever, severe and persistent headaches, bone pain and weight loss, that can be detected by families and by trained primary health-care providers.
Screening is generally not helpful for childhood cancers. In some select cases, it can be considered in high-risk populations. For example, some eye cancers in children can be caused by a mutation that is inherited, so if that mutation or disease is identified in the family of a child with retinoblastoma, genetic counselling can be offered and siblings monitored with regular eye examinations early in life. Genetic causes of childhood cancers are relevant in only a small proportion children with cancer. There is no high-quality evidence to support population-based screening programmes in children.
A correct diagnosis is essential to prescribe appropriate therapy for the type and extent of the disease. Standard therapies include chemotherapy, surgery and/or radiotherapy. Children also need special attention to their continued physical and cognitive growth and nutritional status, which requires a dedicated, multi-disciplinary team. Access to effective diagnosis, essential medicines, pathology, blood products, radiation therapy, technology and psychosocial and supportive care are variable and inequitable around the world. However, cure is possible for more than 80% of children with cancer when childhood cancer services are accessible. Pharmacological treatment, for example, includes inexpensive generic medications included on the WHO List of essential medicines for children. Children who complete treatment require ongoing care to monitor for cancer recurrence and to manage any possible long-term impact of treatment.
Palliative care relieves symptoms caused by cancer and improves the quality of life of patients and their families. Not all children with cancer can be cured, but relief of suffering is possible for everyone. Paediatric palliative care is considered a core component of comprehensive care, starting when the disease is diagnosed and continuing throughout treatment and care, regardless of whether a child receives treatment with curative intent.
Palliative care programmes can be delivered through community and home-based care, providing pain relief and psychosocial support to patients and their families. Adequate access to oral morphine and other pain medicines should be provided for the treatment of moderate to severe cancer pain, which affects more than 80% of cancer patients in the terminal phase.
In 2018, WHO launched, with the support of St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, the Global Initiative for Childhood Cancer , to provide leadership and technical assistance to governments to support them in building and sustaining high-quality childhood cancer programmes. The goal is to achieve at least 60% survival for all children with cancer by 2030. This represents an approximate doubling of the current cure rate and will save an additional 1 million lives over the next decade. The CureAll framework and its accompanying technical package have been developed to support implementation of the Initiative. The package helps governments and other stakeholders assess current capacity, set priorities, generate investment cases, develop evidence-based standards of care and monitor progress. An information-sharing portal has been created to facilitate sharing of expertise between countries and partners.
The Global Initiative is part of the response to the World Health Assembly resolution Cancer Prevention and Control through an Integrated Approach , focused on the reduction of premature mortality from NCDs and the achievement of universal health coverage.
In December 2021, WHO and St Jude Children’s Research Hospital launched the Global Platform for Access to Childhood Cancer Medicines , the first of its kind, to provide an uninterrupted supply of quality-assured childhood cancer medicines with end-to-end support from selecting to dispensing medicines according to best possible care standards. The Global Platform synergizes with the Global Initiative, with activities implemented through this new effort expected to contribute substantially to the achievement of the initiative’s goals.
WHO and the International Agency for Research on Cancer collaborate with the International Atomic Energy Agency and other UN organizations and partners, to:
References
Related
News
Fact sheets

========================================
chlamydia
========================================
Chlamydia is a common sexually transmitted infection that can occur in both men and women. It is caused by a bacterium called Chlamydia trachomatis. It is easily treated and cured with antibiotics.
Chlamydia is unlikely to lead to any long-term problems if treated early. However, without treatment, chlamydia can cause serious problems and may facilitate the transmission and acquisition of HIV and other STIs. If not treated, chlamydia can cause serious problems, including pelvic inflammatory disease and an increased risk of infertility and ectopic pregnancy. In pregnant women, it can cause the baby to be born early or with low birth weight. Correct and consistent use of condoms during sex is the most effective way to prevent chlamydia.
In 2020, an estimated 128.5 million new infections with Chlamydia trachomatis occurred worldwide among adults aged 15 to 49 years. The global prevalence among people aged 15–49 years was estimated to be 4.0% for women and 2.5% for men in 2020. Chlamydial infection is more common in young people. Lymphogranuloma venereum , caused by particular strains of Chlamydia trachomatis, is relatively rare, but there has been a resurgence in some countries, especially among gay men and other men who have sex with men. Another strain of the Chlamydia cause trachoma but transmitted by contact with discharge from the eye and nose, particularly among young children.
Many people with chlamydia have no symptoms or only mild symptoms. If symptoms occur, they may not appear until up to three weeks after having sex with someone who has chlamydia.
Common symptoms in men include: In women, common symptoms include: Anal infection in women and men can cause anorectal:
Oral infection is most often without symptoms. Infants born to mothers with chlamydia may experience eye infections or pneumonia. These can be treated with antibiotic medications for newborns.
The LGV type of chlamydia can cause severe inflammation and can lead to genital ulcer, lymph node enlargement, or inflammation of the anorectal area with discharge, abdominal cramps, diarrhoea, constipation, fever or pain while passing stools.
Chlamydia can cause serious problems if left untreated, particularly among women. Women may develop pelvic inflammatory disease , can experience abdominal and pelvic pain, and in later stages develop infertility and ectopic pregnancy . Men may develop a painful infection in their testicles . In rare cases, this can lead to infertility. Additionally, chlamydia may cause arthritis symptoms, such as swollen joints and inflammation of the eyes. Infection with chlamydia can cause stigma and affect personal relationships. These effects are important but often not quantifiable.
Neonatal infection can cause conjunctivitis and pneumonia. It can also cause preterm deliveries and low birth weight. LGV can be an invasive, systemic infection and, if it is not treated early, can lead to chronic oozing lesions around anorectal region, strictures or reactive joint pain and swelling. Healthcare providers will discuss the patient’s medical and sexual history and conduct a genital examination, including speculum examination and palpation, to enable them have important clues to clinical diagnosis. The most commonly used diagnostic test is nucleic acid amplification tests , considered as the gold standard for diagnosing C. trachomatis. These can be performed in the lab or at the point of care using molecular tests. Urine samples are commonly used for diagnosing chlamydia but are less sensitive than swab-collected samples from genital , anal and oropharyngeal sites. The collection of samples from different anatomic sites depends on sexual practices and medical history. Self-collection of samples is recommended as the tests results are similar than those collected by a health provider.
Because the majority of cases are without symptoms, regular testing for individuals at increased risk of chlamydial infection, such as female sex workers, is recommended to prevent the development of complications and the spread of infection. In many primary health care settings where diagnostic capacity for detecting C. trachomatis is not available, a syndromic approach for case management is recommended.
In the presence chlamydia , tests for other sexually transmitted infections are recommended together with notification of sexual partner(s). For LGV diagnosis a specific molecular test needs to be performed.
Chlamydia is treatable and curable. Uncomplicated chlamydia is treated with antibiotic tablets including doxycycline or azithromycin.
Repeated infections can occur if sexual partners are not treated, and if individuals have sex without condoms with someone who has the infection. Newborns with chlamydial eye infection are treated with azithromycin.
People should wait 7 days after taking the medicine before having sex or, if not possible, use condoms correctly. They should notify their sexual partner(s) to get tested and treated, if necessary. WHO guidelines for the treatment of Chlamydia trachomatis
Consistent and correct use of condoms when having vaginal and anal sex is the only way to prevent chlamydial infection. If you are pregnant, getting tested for chlamydia and receiving prompt treatment if you test positive can prevent transmission to the baby.
There are no vaccines for the prevention of chlamydial infection.
The WHO has recognized chlamydia as an important public health problem along with other sexually transmitted infections and has set ambitious targets to reduce their global burden through prevention, diagnosis, and treatment strategies. The Global health sector strategies on HIV, viral hepatitis and STIs 2022–2030 aims for a 50% reduction in new cases of chlamydia by 2030. WHO is working with countries and partners to improve people-centred case management, ensure appropriate treatment, to scale up access to effective testing and partner services, to support the development of quality affordable diagnostics treatment and vaccines, and to improve country and global level monitoring of new infections. Related
Fact sheets
Feature stories

========================================
cholera
========================================
Cholera is an acute diarrheal infection caused by consuming food or water contaminated with the bacterium Vibrio cholerae. It is a global public health threat and indicates inequity and lack of social and economic development. Access to safe water, basic sanitation and hygiene is essential to prevent cholera and other waterborne diseases.
Most people with cholera have mild or moderate diarrhoea and can be treated with oral rehydration solution . However, the disease can progress rapidly, so starting treatment quickly is vital to save lives. Patients with severe disease need intravenous fluids, ORS and antibiotics.
Countries need strong epidemiological and laboratory surveillance to swiftly detect and monitor outbreaks and guide responses.
Cholera can cause severe acute watery diarrhoea, which can be fatal within hours if untreated. Most people infected with V. cholerae do not develop symptoms but can spread the bacteria through their faeces for 1–10 days. Symptoms appear 12 hours to 5 days after infection (2).
Most people with the disease have mild or moderate symptoms. A minority of patients develop severe acute watery diarrhoea and life-threatening dehydration.
Cholera has been known for many centuries. The first pandemic, or global epidemic, was recorded in the 19th century. Since then, six pandemics have killed millions of people worldwide. The current pandemic started in south Asia in 1961 and continues to affect populations globally.
Only two serogroups, O1 and O139, cause cholera outbreaks. V. cholerae O1 has caused all recent outbreaks. V. cholerae O139 caused outbreaks in Asia in the past but has recently only been identified in sporadic cases. There is no difference in the illness caused by the two serogroups.
Cholera outbreaks occur regularly in some countries. In others, they are less frequent, and it may be years between outbreaks. Cholera is linked to limited access to safe water, basic sanitation facilities and poor hygiene practices. This may be due to conflict, population displacement, climate events like cyclones, floods or drought, and lack of investment in maintaining and improving WASH services and infrastructure.
The number of cholera cases reported to WHO has continued to rise in recent years. In 2023, 535 321 cases and 4007 deaths were reported to WHO from 45 countries (3). The discrepancy between these figures and the numbers estimated by researchers is likely due to limited surveillance systems and cases not being recorded out of fear of repercussions for trade and tourism.
Preventing and controlling cholera involves a combination of strengthening surveillance, improving water, sanitation and hygiene, increasing risk communication and community engagement, improving access to quality treatment and implementing oral cholera vaccine campaigns.
Cholera surveillance should be part of an integrated disease surveillance system. This includes timely reporting, data analysis, interpretation and sharing of information from local to global levels. Rapid diagnostic tests are useful for early detection of probable cholera outbreaks, but confirmation requires laboratory testing by culture, seroagglutination or polymerase chain reaction .
Countries at risk or affected by cholera should strengthen their surveillance systems according to the revised Global Taskforce on Cholera Control recommendations to quickly detect and respond to outbreaks. The long-term solution for cholera control lies in economic development and universal access to safe drinking water, basic sanitation and good hygiene practices. WASH interventions help prevent many waterborne illnesses, including cholera, and contribute to the Sustainable Development Goals. During outbreaks, implementing WASH activities can reduce cholera transmission. These activities include improving WASH in healthcare facilities, conducting water quality monitoring, distributing WASH kits to communities and promoting protective hygiene practices.
Cholera is an easily treatable disease. Most people can be treated successfully with prompt ORS administration. Severely dehydrated patients are at risk of dying from dehydration and need rapid intravenous fluids. They also receive oral rehydration solution and antibiotics. Patients with underlying conditions or comorbidities may require additional care in specific treatment centres. The case fatality rate in treatment centres should remain below 1%.
Community access to ORS is essential during a cholera outbreak. Mass administration of antibiotics to prevent cholera is not recommended, as it has no proven effect on the spread of cholera and may contribute to antimicrobial resistance.
Community engagement involves collaborating with people and communities to develop and implement programmes designed to address their needs. Local culture, practices and beliefs are central to promoting protective practices, such as handwashing with soap and water, safe preparation and storage of food and water, and safe disposal of faeces. Funeral practices for individuals who die from cholera may need to be adapted to prevent infection among attendees. Communities should be involved in deciding the location of oral rehydration points and other community cholera control interventions.
Community engagement is essential for effectively communicating the potential risks and symptoms of cholera, precautions to take to avoid cholera, when and where to report cases, and the importance of seeking immediate treatment if symptoms appear.
Currently, three WHO pre-qualified oral cholera vaccines are available: Dukoral®, Euvichol-Plus®, and Euvichol-S®. All require two doses to fully protect an adult. One dose of Euvichol-Plus® or Euvichol-S® provides good short-term protection. Euvichol-S®, pre-qualified by WHO in 2024, is a simplified version of Euvichol-Plus®. The Shancol vaccine is no longer produced.
Euvichol-Plus® and Euvichol-S® do not require a buffer solution and can be given to anyone over one year old. These are the only vaccines currently available for mass vaccination campaigns through the Global OCV Stockpile, supported by Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance. Since October 2022, due to an ongoing global shortage of vaccines, and with the acceptance of the Strategic Advisory Group of Experts SAGE), only one-dose vaccine regimens are being used.
OCV is safe during pregnancy.
More information on WHO's policy on OCV
WHO has developed six cholera kits to support the investigation and confirmation of cholera outbreaks and the treatment of patients:
Each treatment kit provides enough materials to treat 100 patients. More information about cholera kits
The Global Task Force on Cholera Control is a partnership of governmental and nongovernmental organizations, UN agencies and academic institutions with a common mission to reduce the global cholera burden. The GTFCC Secretariat is hosted by WHO. GTFCC partners work to:
More about the GTFCC core activities and progress In 2017, the GTFCC published the Ending cholera: a global roadmap to 2030 strategy. It aims to reduce cholera deaths by 90% and eliminate cholera in as many as 20 countries by 2030 through:
The strategy was endorsed at the Seventy-first World Health Assembly in 2018. More about the strategy
The WHO cholera programme works to increase awareness of cholera and advocate for its control globally. At Member State level, WHO supports countries in all pillars of cholera control including strengthening epidemiological surveillance, reinforcing laboratory capacity, improving access to and quality of treatment, implementing appropriate WASH and IPC practices, promoting community engagement in cholera prevention and control and facilitating OCV access and campaign implementation. WHO and partners also support research for the development of innovative strategies to prevent and control cholera. WHO hosts the GTFCC Secretariat and is a member of the International Coordinating Group emergency vaccination stockpile coordination mechanism.
References
Related
More about cholera
Oral cholera vaccines
News
Feature stories
More
Revised cholera kitThe revised cholera kits are designed to help prepare for a potential cholera outbreak and to support the first month of the initial response.Access the cholera kit
Revised cholera kitThe revised cholera kits are designed to help prepare for a potential cholera outbreak and to support the first month of the initial response.Access the cholera kit
Revised cholera kit
The revised cholera kits are designed to help prepare for a potential cholera outbreak and to support the first month of the initial response.

========================================
chromoblastomycosis
========================================
Chromoblastomycosis is a sporadically occurring infection seen in tropical and subtropical climates caused by a number of different pigmented fungi, the most common of which are Fonsecaea pedrosoi, Fonsecaea monophora and Cladophialophora carrionii. Other fungi can also cause chromoblastomycosis. Chromoblastomycosis can cause disability due to limb enlargement, which may lead to inability to work and considerable social stigma. Rarely, the fungi that cause chromoblastomycosis can infect other organs, such as the brain, or lead to skin cancer.
Who is at risk? Chromoblastomycosis affects normal healthy people and is mainly seen in adults. Agricultural workers are the most common occupational group to be infected. Chromoblastomycosis presents with wart-like lesions on exposed areas of the skin such as the legs or forearms. These can exceed 10 centimetres in diameter. Patches of skin may also appear flattened and show central scarring or atrophy, but they are not itchy or painful. Pain and itching can appear in moderate or severe disease. Small dark spots can be seen on the surface of lesions and represent clusters of the pigmented fungal cells – an important diagnostic clue. Large lesions cause severe limb swelling and discomfort, limiting movement. In longstanding cases, secondary bacterial infections are common and the smell from affected limbs may be unpleasant, which may also lead to social exclusion. There is a risk of development of squamous cell carcinoma of the skin in longstanding untreated lesions.
Although the infection usually remains in one body region, local spread through the lymphatics, and very rarely blood stream dissemination to the central nervous system, can occur.
This infection occurs when fungi from the natural environment invade deeper parts of an individual’s skin after their skin is damaged by a superficial abrasion or a penetrating injury. An infected person cannot directly transmit the infection to other people. Intermediate vectors, such as mosquitoes, do not transmit chromoblastomycosis.
Chromoblastomycosis can be treated with oral itraconazole or terbinafine. Voriconazole, intravenous amphotericin B and oral flucytosine have also been used. Other methods of treatment include local application of heat, cryotherapy and photodynamic therapy. Surgical reductions have been used but should be given following initial chemotherapy to avoid local recurrence. Early treatment is key, providing the best results after about 3–6 months. Patients with large or extensive chromoblastomycosis and limb swelling often require over a year of treatment and there may be residual lymphoedema in such cases. There is no evidence that different fungal species respond differently to the antifungal medicines recommended for treatment.
The earliest lesions of chromoblastomycosis are small, raised lumps or nodules on the skin surface with no specific visible diagnostic features. Therefore, diagnosis depends on demonstrating the characteristic thick-walled, single or multicellular clusters of pigmented fungal cells, known as muriform or sclerotic bodies, either in scrapings from lesions or in histopathology of biopsy material. Clusters of these cells can be found in the dark spots seen on the surface of the skin lesions and these provide the best sites for taking a skin scraping with a scalpel blade or for a biopsy. Culture or molecular diagnosis is helpful in confirming the diagnosis but decisions on treatment can be made without identification of the organism. All laboratory diagnostic methods require specialized skills and training, and there is currently insufficient diagnostic expertise in many endemic areas. The cost of effective antifungal medicines in endemic countries is a major challenge that can limit successful completion of treatment as patients often cannot afford them.
The largest number of cases of chromoblastomycosis has occurred in Central America and northern South America, Africa, China and the West Pacific. Brazil, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Madagascar and Venezuela have reported the most cases. The global incidence of chromoblastomycosis is unknown. Chromoblastomycosis is recognized as a neglected tropical disease and is included in the NTD road map 2021−2030 to increase surveillance and visibility of the disease. In 2022, WHO published the skin NTD framework to promote integration across different skin diseases and support the evolving Programme for Skin NTDs. One of the key challenges of chromoblastomycosis is the lack of information on its global prevalence as cases are not currently reported. Skin NTD programmes are expected to provide more data on incidence of the infection. The 2021−2030 roadmap promotes early identification of affected individuals. This can be achieved through training of health care workers aimed at improving awareness and disease recognition. Capacity strengthening on skin NTDs is key. Chromoblastomycosis is included in several WHO technical resources such as the Skin NTD training manual and mobile app as well as a dedicated online course available on the OpenWHO platform: Chromoblastomycosis: training for national and district-level health workers.
Related
Fact sheets

========================================
chronic-obstructive-pulmonary-disease-(copd)
========================================
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is a common lung disease causing restricted airflow and breathing problems. It is sometimes called emphysema or chronic bronchitis.
In people with COPD, the lungs can get damaged or clogged with phlegm. Symptoms include cough, sometimes with phlegm, difficulty breathing, wheezing and tiredness.
Smoking and air pollution are the most common causes of COPD. People with COPD are at higher risk of other health problems. COPD is not curable but symptoms can improve if one avoids smoking and exposure to air pollution and gets vaccines to prevent infections. It can also be treated with medicines, oxygen and pulmonary rehabilitation.
The most common symptoms of COPD are difficulty breathing, chronic cough and feeling tired.
COPD symptoms can get worse quickly. These are called flare-ups. These usually last for a few days and often require additional medicine. People with COPD also have a higher risk for other health problems. These include: Common symptoms of COPD develop from mid-life onwards. As COPD progresses, people find it more difficult to carry out their normal daily activities, often due to breathlessness. There may be a considerable financial burden due to limitation of workplace and home productivity, and costs of medical treatment.
COPD is sometimes called emphysema or chronic bronchitis. Emphysema usually refers to destruction of the tiny air sacs at the end of the airways in the lungs. Chronic bronchitis refers to a chronic cough with the production of phlegm resulting from inflammation in the airways. COPD and asthma share common symptoms and people may have both conditions.
Several processes can cause the airways to become narrow and lead to COPD. There may be destruction of parts of the lung, mucus blocking the airways, and inflammation and swelling of the airway lining.
COPD develops gradually over time, often resulting from a combination of risk factors:
COPD should be suspected if a person has typical symptoms, and the diagnosis confirmed by a breathing test called spirometry, which measures how the lungs are working. In low- and middle-income countries, spirometry is often not available and so the diagnosis may be missed. COPD isn’t curable, but it can get better by not smoking, avoiding air pollution and getting vaccines. It can be treated with medicines, oxygen and pulmonary rehabilitation.
There are several treatments available for COPD. Inhaled medicines that open and reduce swelling in the airways are the main treatments.
Bronchodilator inhalers are the most important medicines for treating COPD. They relax the airways to keep them open.
Short-acting bronchodilators start to work in seconds and can last for 4–6 hours. These are often used during flare-ups. Long-acting bronchodilators take longer to start working but last longer. These are taken daily and can be combined with inhaled steroids. Other treatments may also be used: Some inhalers open the airways and may be given regularly to prevent or reduce symptoms, and to relieve symptoms during acute flare-ups. Inhaled corticosteroids are sometimes given in combination with these to reduce inflammation in the lungs. Inhalers must be taken using the correct technique, and in some cases with a spacer device to help deliver the medication into the airways more effectively. Access to inhalers is limited in many low- and middle-income countries; in 2021 salbutamol inhalers were generally available in public primary health care facilities in half of low- and low-middle income countries.
Flare-ups are often caused by a respiratory infection, and people may be given an antibiotic or steroid tablets in addition to inhaled or nebulised treatment as needed. Lifestyle changes can help improve symptoms of COPD. Quit smoking or vaping. This is the most important thing to do. Even if you have been smoking for many years, quitting can still help. Avoid second-hand smoke or smoke from indoor cooking fires.
Stay physically active.
Protect yourself from lung infections: People living with COPD must be given information about their condition, treatment and self-care to help them to stay as active and healthy as possible.
COPD is included in the WHO Global Action Plan for the Prevention and Control of Noncommunicable Diseases and the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
WHO is taking action to extend diagnosis of and treatment for COPD in a number of ways.
The WHO Package of Essential Noncommunicable Disease Interventions was developed to help improve NCD management in primary health care in low-resource settings. PEN includes protocols for the assessment, diagnosis and management of chronic respiratory diseases , and modules on healthy lifestyle counselling, including tobacco cessation and self-care. Rehabilitation 2030 is a new strategic approach to prioritize and strengthen rehabilitation services in health systems. Pulmonary rehabilitation for COPD is included in the Package of Interventions for Rehabilitation, recently developed as part of this WHO initiative. Reducing tobacco smoke exposure is important for both primary prevention of COPD and disease management. The Framework Convention on Tobacco Control is enabling progress in this area as are WHO initiatives such as MPOWER and mTobacco Cessation.
Further prevention activities include the WHO Clean Household Energy Solutions Toolkit to promote clean and safe interventions in the home and facilitate the design of policies that promote the adoption of clean household energy at local, programmatic and national levels.
The Global Alliance against Chronic Respiratory Diseases contributes to WHO’s work to prevent and control chronic respiratory diseases. GARD is a voluntary alliance of national and international organizations and agencies from many countries committed to the vision of a world where all people breathe freely. Related
Fact sheets
More Science in 5 podcast on COPD Science in 5 podcast on COPD

========================================
civil-registration-and-vital-statistics
========================================
Countries use civil registration to record vital events such as birth, marriage, divorce, adoption, death and cause of death. Information on births and deaths by location, age, sex and cause is the cornerstone of public health and social development planning. The main source of vital statistics is civil registration. “Civil registration is defined as the continuous, permanent, compulsory and universal recording of the occurrence and characteristics of vital events pertaining to the population, as provided through decree or regulation in accordance with the legal requirements in each country”(2). The availability of detailed vital statistics for a country or area illustrates national capacity in the compilation of these statistics from civil registration systems (3).
Birth registration provides a basis for social inclusion and individual legal identity, which is a human right. Registering births, deaths and causes of death allows countries to identify their most pressing health and social issues such as fertility rates or resolution of criminal cases. Civil registration and vital statistic systems are complex, but advances in computerization are removing barriers, facilitating registration procedures and enabling data exchange and production. An integrated CRVS system analyses and uses these data to allocate resources appropriately, develop policies and make decisions that will influence the path towards the Sustainable Development Goal targets. Many barriers still prevent people from registering births and deaths, including when countries do not have the necessary laws or infrastructure to register all births and deaths. Censuses and surveys can be used to estimate population numbers, but these are not designed to capture information on all causes of death. Some countries have set up sample registration systems that can generate nationally representative mortality data. In the absence of medical certification of causes of death, the WHO standard verbal autopsy questionnaires can be used to generate population-level cause-of-death statistics. The COVID-19 pandemic highlighted the important use of mortality data. The analysis of excess mortality, which is the extra number of deaths compared to what would be expected in normal times, revealed the true impact of the pandemic. Excess mortality includes deaths resulting directly from COVID-19 and those indirectly related to it, for example when over-stretched healthcare systems struggle to provide care to patients during the pandemic. From January 2020 to December 2021, around 14.9 million extra deaths happened because of the pandemic.
The CRVS system is considered as the most reliable source of statistics on births, migration, life expectancy, deaths and causes of death. WHO is working with partners to prioritize CRVS strengthening at global, regional and country levels. The WHO CRVS Strategic Implementation Plan 2021–2025 is based on four strategic objectives to accelerate CRVS system strengthening in Member States through more effective engagement and leadership by the health sector. Moreover, by virtue of its reach and proximity to the population it serves, the health sector is ideally placed to support the registration of births and deaths where laws permit. WHO, in collaboration with UNICEF, has published guidance on the health sector contributions towards improving the civil registration of births and deaths in low-income countries.
WHO sets the norms and standards for the generation of cause-of-death statistics to ensure comparability across countries. For more than a century, the International Classification of Diseases has been the basis for comparable statistics on causes of mortality and morbidity between places and over time. Originating in the 19th century, the latest version, ICD-11, was adopted by the 72nd World Health Assembly in 2019 and came into effect on 1 January 2022. Strengthening CRVS systems requires collaboration with partners to align investment and avoid duplication of efforts. The Health Data Collaborative has set up a CRVS technical group to support coordinated country-level engagement. The three levels of WHO coordinate technical support to countries. WHO also supports regional initiatives led by development partners to promote CRVS in the global agenda.
In order to monitor and improve global health, WHO has set up the WHO Mortality Database since 1950 with the aim to gather information about deaths and causes of death. With data from more than 120 countries’ CRVS systems, the WHO Mortality Database is the premier data source for international comparative epidemiological studies of mortality by cause. It has underpinned global policies to improve population health such as reduction in tobacco smoking, prevention of mortality from road traffic accidents and noncommunicable diseases.
By monitoring the global availability and quality of cause-of-death data, WHO can identify gaps in systems, resources and support that need to be prioritized to improve health situations.
Information on births, deaths and causes of deaths is an integral part of a country’s health information system. Health professionals use the information to plan for health services and monitor the effectiveness of their interventions. In this regard, the SCORE for Health Data Technical Package was developed by WHO and partners to assist Member States in strengthening country data systems and capacity to monitor progress towards the health-related SDGs, universal health care, and other national and subnational health priorities and targets.
The SCORE for Health Data Technical Package converges comprehensive strategies and interventions for strengthening country health information systems. Launched in August 2020, the report is a concrete starting point to improve the availability of timely, reliable and comparable health data to track progress towards the Triple Billion targets and health-related Sustainable Development Goals.
The C in SCORE stands for Count, which is to count births, deaths and causes of deaths, including the full birth and death registration and certification and report on causes of death. The SCORE assessment has enabled countries to look at the maturity of their CRVS systems, identify gaps and moved CRVS to the top of their priorities.
References
Related
News
Feature stories

========================================
climate-change-and-health
========================================
Climate change presents a fundamental threat to human health. It affects the physical environment as well as all aspects of both natural and human systems – including social and economic conditions and the functioning of health systems. It is therefore a threat multiplier, undermining and potentially reversing decades of health progress. As climatic conditions change, more frequent and intensifying weather and climate events are observed, including storms, extreme heat, floods, droughts and wildfires. These weather and climate hazards affect health both directly and indirectly, increasing the risk of deaths, noncommunicable diseases, the emergence and spread of infectious diseases, and health emergencies. Climate change is also having an impact on our health workforce and infrastructure, reducing capacity to provide universal health coverage . More fundamentally, climate shocks and growing stresses such as changing temperature and precipitation patterns, drought, floods and rising sea levels degrade the environmental and social determinants of physical and mental health. All aspects of health are affected by climate change, from clean air, water and soil to food systems and livelihoods. Further delay in tackling climate change will increase health risks, undermine decades of improvements in global health, and contravene our collective commitments to ensure the human right to health for all.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change's Sixth Assessment Report concluded that climate risks are appearing faster and will become more severe sooner than previously expected, and it will be harder to adapt with increased global heating.
It further reveals that 3.6 billion people already live in areas highly susceptible to climate change. Despite contributing minimally to global emissions, low-income countries and small island developing states endure the harshest health impacts. In vulnerable regions, the death rate from extreme weather events in the last decade was 15 times higher than in less vulnerable ones.
Climate change is impacting health in a myriad of ways, including by leading to death and illness from increasingly frequent extreme weather events, such as heatwaves, storms and floods, the disruption of food systems, increases in zoonoses and food-, water- and vector-borne diseases, and mental health issues. Furthermore, climate change is undermining many of the social determinants for good health, such as livelihoods, equality and access to health care and social support structures. These climate-sensitive health risks are disproportionately felt by the most vulnerable and disadvantaged, including women, children, ethnic minorities, poor communities, migrants or displaced persons, older populations, and those with underlying health conditions.
Figure: An overview of climate-sensitive health risks, their exposure pathways and vulnerability factors. Climate change impacts health both directly and indirectly, and is strongly mediated by environmental, social and public health determinants.
Although it is unequivocal that climate change affects human health, it remains challenging to accurately estimate the scale and impact of many climate-sensitive health risks. However, scientific advances progressively allow us to attribute an increase in morbidity and mortality to global warming, and more accurately determine the risks and scale of these health threats.
WHO data indicates 2 billion people lack safe drinking water and 600 million suffer from foodborne illnesses annually, with children under 5 bearing 30% of foodborne fatalities. Climate stressors heighten waterborne and foodborne disease risks. In 2020, 770 million faced hunger, predominantly in Africa and Asia. Climate change affects food availability, quality and diversity, exacerbating food and nutrition crises.
Temperature and precipitation changes enhance the spread of vector-borne diseases. Without preventive actions, deaths from such diseases, currently over 700 000 annually, may rise. Climate change induces both immediate mental health issues, like anxiety and post-traumatic stress, and long-term disorders due to factors like displacement and disrupted social cohesion.
Recent research attributes 37% of heat-related deaths to human-induced climate change. Heat-related deaths among those over 65 have risen by 70% in two decades. In 2020, 98 million more experienced food insecurity compared to the 1981–2010 average. The WHO conservatively projects 250 000 additional yearly deaths by the 2030s due to climate change impacts on diseases like malaria and coastal flooding. However, modelling challenges persist, especially around capturing risks like drought and migration pressures.
The climate crisis threatens to undo the last 50 years of progress in development, global health and poverty reduction, and to further widen existing health inequalities between and within populations. It severely jeopardizes the realization of UHC in various ways, including by compounding the existing burden of disease and by exacerbating existing barriers to accessing health services, often at the times when they are most needed. Over 930 million people – around 12% of the world’s population – spend at least 10% of their household budget to pay for health care. With the poorest people largely uninsured, health shocks and stresses already currently push around 100 million people into poverty every year, with the impacts of climate change worsening this trend.
In the short- to medium-term, the health impacts of climate change will be determined mainly by the vulnerability of populations, their resilience to the current rate of climate change and the extent and pace of adaptation. In the longer-term, the effects will increasingly depend on the extent to which transformational action is taken now to reduce emissions and avoid the breaching of dangerous temperature thresholds and potential irreversible tipping points.
While no one is safe from these risks, the people whose health is being harmed first and worst by the climate crisis are the people who contribute least to its causes, and who are least able to protect themselves and their families against it: people in low-income and disadvantaged countries and communities.
Addressing climate change's health burden underscores the equity imperative: those most responsible for emissions should bear the highest mitigation and adaptation costs, emphasizing health equity and vulnerable group prioritization.
To avert catastrophic health impacts and prevent millions of climate change-related deaths, the world must limit temperature rise to 1.5°C. Past emissions have already made a certain level of global temperature rise and other changes to the climate inevitable. Global heating of even 1.5°C is not considered safe, however; every additional tenth of a degree of warming will take a serious toll on people’s lives and health.
WHO’s response to these challenges centres around 3 main objectives:
Leadership and Raising Awareness: WHO leads in emphasizing climate change's health implications, aiming to centralize health in climate policies, including through the UNFCCC. Partnering with major health agencies, health professionals and civil society, WHO strives to embed climate change in health priorities like UHC and target carbon neutrality by 2030.
Evidence and Monitoring: WHO, with its network of global experts, contributes global evidence summaries, provides assistance to nations in their assessments, and monitors progress. The emphasis is on deploying effective policies and enhancing access to knowledge and data.
Capacity Building and Country Support: Through WHO offices, support is given to ministries of health, focusing on collaboration across sectors, updated guidance, hands-on training, and support for project preparation and execution as well as for securing climate and health funding. WHO leads the Alliance for Transformative Action on Climate and Health , bringing together a range of health and development partners, to support countries in achieving their commitments to climate-resilient and low carbon health systems.
Related
News
Fact sheets
Feature stories

========================================
colorectal-cancer
========================================
Colorectal cancer is a type of cancer that affects the colon or rectum. It is one of the most common types of cancer worldwide. It can cause severe harm and death.
The risk of colorectal cancer increases with age. Most cases affect people over 50 years old. Common symptoms include diarrhoea, constipation, blood in the stool, abdominal pain, unexplained weight loss, fatigue, and low iron levels. Many people will not have symptoms in the early stages of the disease. The risk of colorectal cancer can be reduced by eating a healthy diet, staying physically active, not smoking tobacco and limiting alcohol. Regular screenings are crucial for early detection.
Colon cancer is the second leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide. In 2020, more than 1.9 million new cases of colorectal cancer and more than 930 000 deaths due to colorectal cancer were estimated to have occurred worldwide. Large geographical variations in incidence and mortality rates were observed. The incidence rates were highest in Europe and Australia and New Zealand, and the mortality rates were highest in Eastern Europe. By 2040 the burden of colorectal cancer will increase to 3.2 million new cases per year and 1.6 million deaths per year . Incidence rates of colorectal cancer have been decreasing in high-income countries, largely as a result of effective screening programmes. The prognosis for colorectal cancer varies depending on the stage at diagnosis. Early-stage cancers have higher survival rates than advanced-stage cancers. Timely diagnosis, appropriate treatment, and regular follow-up care are important for improving survival rates and quality of life.
Factors that may increase the risk of developing colorectal cancer include:
Colorectal cancer often has no symptoms in the early stages. Regular screenings are important to catch the disease early and begin treatment. Common symptoms include:
Lifestyle changes and regular screening can help prevent colorectal cancer. Lifestyle changes to help prevent colorectal cancer include:
People who suspect they may have colorectal cancer should speak to their healthcare provider right away. Regular screening for colorectal cancer is the best way to catch the disease early.
Treatments are more likely to cure the disease in the early stages.
Studies have shown that screening can reduce both the incidence and mortality of colorectal cancer through early detection and removal of precancerous growths. Stool-based tests are non-invasive screening methods used to detect the presence of colorectal cancer or precancerous polyps in the stool. The common type of stool-based tests is the fecal occult blood test . FOBT detects hidden blood in the stool, which can be an indicator of colorectal cancer or polyps. It involves collecting a small sample of stool and sending it to a laboratory for analysis. If blood or abnormal findings are detected in the stool, further diagnostic procedures, such as colonoscopy, are usually recommended to confirm the presence of colorectal cancer or polyps.
Stool-based tests are convenient, non-invasive, and can be effective in detecting colorectal cancer at early stages or identifying precancerous polyps.
Individuals with a family history of colorectal cancer or certain genetic conditions may benefit from genetic counselling and genetic testing to assess their risk and determine appropriate screening measures.
Diagnostic methods for colorectal cancer include physical examination, imaging , examination of the inside of the colon using colonoscopy or sigmoidoscopy, taking a sample of tissue for histopathology examination, and molecular testing to identify specific genetic mutations or biomarkers to guide the best treatment option. Treatments for colorectal cancer are based on the type and progression of the cancer and the person’s medical history. Early detection of colorectal cancer can lead to better treatments and outcomes.
Treatments include: Surgery is often used in the early stages of cancer if the tumour has not spread to other areas of the body. Chemotherapy and radiation therapy can help shrink the tumour.
Doctors from several disciplines often work together to provide treatment and care of people with colorectal cancer.
Supportive care is important for people with colorectal cancer. It aims to manage symptoms, provide pain relief, and give emotional support. It can help to increase quality of life for people with colorectal cancer and their families.
a) Early stage disease. The primary treatment for early stage colorectal cancer (i.e. tumour limited to the bowel or local lymph nodes, with no metastatic dissemination to distant organs) is surgical removal of the tumour and nearby lymph nodes. The specific surgical procedure depends on the location of the tumour. It may involve a colectomy or a proctectomy . In some cases, a temporary or permanent colostomy or ileostomy may be needed to create an opening for waste elimination. Adjuvant therapy refers to additional treatment given after surgery to lower the risk of cancer recurrence. In early-stage colorectal cancer, adjuvant chemotherapy may be recommended to kill any remaining cancer cells that cannot be seen or removed during surgery. Adjuvant chemotherapy is typically recommended for patients with a higher risk of recurrence, such as those with lymph node involvement or certain tumour characteristics. Sometimes chemotherapy may be given before surgery to shrink the tumour. Radiation therapy can be associated in tumours of the last segment of the intestine to increase the chance of reduce the size of the tumour.
After treatment, regular follow-up visits and surveillance are essential to monitor for any signs of recurrence or new cancer. Surveillance may include physical examinations, blood tests, and imaging studies to detect any potential recurrence at an early stage.
a) Advanced disease. Systemic therapy is the primary treatment approach for metastatic colorectal cancer, as it aims to treat cancer cells throughout the body. Chemotherapy is often used as the first-line treatment for metastatic colorectal cancer. Combination chemotherapy regimens are commonly used to kill cancer cells or slow down their growth. Targeted therapy may be used in combination with chemotherapy for patients with specific genetic mutations, such as KRAS or BRAF mutations. Immunotherapy drugs may be considered for patients with tumours that exhibit specific genetic markers, such as microsatellite instability-high or mismatch repair deficiency .
In some cases, surgery may be recommended for metastatic colorectal cancer to remove tumours that are causing symptoms or blocking the intestine. Localized treatments, such as radiofrequency ablation, cryoablation, or radiation therapy, may be used to treat specific areas of metastasis, such as liver metastases. Radiation therapy may be used to help control the disease and manage symptoms, such as pain or bleeding.
Clinical trials offer opportunities to access novel treatments or experimental therapies for patients. Participation in clinical trials helps advance medical knowledge and potentially offers new treatment options.
The WHO is actively involved in addressing the global burden of colorectal cancer and implementing strategies to reduce its impact. WHO's approach involves raising awareness, cancer prevention and control, early detection and screening, strengthening health systems, capacity building, research and surveillance, as well as collaboration and partnerships. These comprehensive efforts contribute to reducing the burden of colorectal cancer by promoting prevention, early detection, equitable access to quality care, and improving overall cancer control globally.
Fact sheets
More
Colorectal Cancer Screening: IARC Handbooks of Cancer Prevention Volume 17ESMO Localised Colon Cancer: GuidelineESMO Clinical Practice Guideline – Metastatic Colorectal CancerESMO Colorectal Cancer: A Guide for Patients

========================================
commercial-determinants-of-health
========================================
OverviewThe social determinants of health are the conditions in which people are born, grow, work, live, and age, the systems put in place to deal with illness, and the wider set of forces and systems shaping the conditions of daily life. These forces and systems include economic policies and systems, development agendas, social norms, social policies and political systems. Social determinants of health matter because addressing them not only helps prevents illness, but also promotes healthy lives and societal equity.Commercial determinants of health are a key social determinant, and refer to the conditions, actions and omissions by commercial actors that affect health. Commercial determinants arise in the context of the provision of goods or services for payment and include commercial activities, as well as the environment in which commerce takes place. They can have beneficial or detrimental impacts on health.Companies shape our physical and social environmentsCommercial activities shape the physical and social environments in which people are born, grow, work, live and age – both positively and negatively. For example:Company choices in the production, price-setting and targeted marketing of products, such as breast-milk substitutes, ultra-processed foods, tobacco, sugar-sweetened beverages and alcohol lead to diseases such as cardiovascular disease, type 2 diabetes and certain cancers, as well as hypertension and obesity.Young people are especially at risk of being influenced by advertisements and celebrity promotion of material. For example, fast-food advertising to youth activates highly sensitive and still-developing pathways in teens’ brains. Mass removal of trees creates mosquito breeding sites, causing vector-borne disease outbreaks like malaria and chikungunya, with up to 20% of malaria risk in deforestation hotspots attributable to international trade of deforestation-implicated export commodities such as timber, tobacco, cocoa, coffee and cotton.Factories, which are disproportionately located in disadvantaged communities, pollute the air, causing and exacerbating respiratory diseases.Unsafe or toxic work environments can impact employee mental health, for example for women working in the ready-made garment industry.Commercial action in knowledge environments can foment groundless doubt and contribute to climate change denialism or vaccine hesitancy. Intensive animal agriculture is a leading cause of climate change, deforestation, antimicrobial resistance, and air, soil and water pollution. The consumption of animal-derived food products is linked to higher rates of noncommunicable diseases, including some cancers and diabetes. Workers in slaughterhouses and meat packaging facilities, which are often located in disadvantaged communities, suffered high rates of injury and experienced high rates of infection from COVID-19. Harmful use of intellectual property law can prevent some communities to access affordable medicines.However, there are positive contributions by to public health, for example when companies implement the following health interventions:increasing the availability of essential medicines and health technologies, and supporting improved access to essential, high-quality, safe, effective and affordable medicines and medical products;reformulation of goods and products to reduce harm and injury, including the industry introduction of seat belts, efforts to reduce salt content in food production, and to eliminate trans fats from the global food supply; ensuring living wages, paid parental leave to improve child health outcomes, sick leave and access to health insurance; andfinancial decisions to divest from products and services harmful to health.The workplace also functions as a setting of health promotion and protection against harm, allowing following:principles to guard against modern slavery, exploitation or indentured servitude;occupational health and safety standards and hygiene practices that reduce the risk of disease or work-related disability;health promotion activities aimed at the workforce, including use of stairs, healthy canteens, walkathons or sports events; andhealth literacy events, including awareness building about deadly ailments, blood donation or vaccination.Commercial determinants drive inequitiesCommercial determinants often disproportionately affect countries and populations that are not profiting from the product or service that causes harm to health or planet, but instead are faced with the burdens of these harms. As a result, they shape health equities, both within and between countries.Commercial determinants also contribute to other factors that shape health and health equities through broader economic systems and economic determinants. This includes through economic development or trade policies, broader social, economic and political systems, and finance or investment flows. Examples include:income leveleducational opportunitiesoccupation, employment status and workplace safetyfood insecurity and inaccessibility of nutritious food choicesaccess to housing and utility serviceshigher use of tobacco in some regionsgender inequityracial segregation.Countries with commodity-dependent economies are especially vulnerable, such as Small Island Developing States and least developed countries. They face greater pressure from industry due, for example, to greater employer status or multinational trading agreements.Private sector influence on health policyRecent decades have seen a transfer of resources to private enterprise, which now plays an increasing role in public health policy and regulation and outcomes. The emergence of non-State actors in the geopolitical arena, together with a shift in global governance, are fundamental to understanding the development of commercial determinants of health. Various authors have catalogued pathways of private sector health strategies and impact, including influencing the political environment, the knowledge environment and preference shaping.There are multiple pathways that commercial actors influence health policy. Companies commonly influence public health through lobbying and party donations. This incentivizes politicians and political parties to align decisions with commercial agendas. Further, some commercial actors work to capture branches of government in order to prevent or weaken regulation of their products and services, leading to unregulated activity, limiting their liability and bypassing the threat of litigation and pre-emption.More subtly, the private sector has been known to influence the direction and volume of research through funding medical education and research, where data may be skewed in favour of commercial interests. To further shape preferences, some companies capture civil society by founding or funding front groups, consumer groups and think tanks, allowing them to manufacture doubt and promote their framings.Addressing commercial determinantsPartnering with civil society, adopting so-called best buy strategies and conflict of interest policies and supporting safe spaces for discussions with industry are all examples of how countries can address the commercial determinants of health. More research is needed on the health equity dimensions of commercial determinants of health as well as governance considerations, including transparency and accountability, in addition to state capabilities to avoid corruption and steer private sector engagements. There are clear opportunities to move forward on the commercial determinants, particularly in better understanding and addressing the conflicts of interest but also potential co-benefits of private sector action for better health, at global, national and local levels. The role for transformative partnerships and approaches to achieve the ambitious global health goals was already recognized by the UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development but has been brought to the forefront by COVID-19, with increasing attention on the role the private sector plays in health outcomes both within academia and from civil society. This has led to increased scrutiny on the role of the private sector in health and health equity, as well as increasing initiatives within the private sector itself to position itself as a partner. Examples of actions governments around the world are taking to address commercial determinants to improve public health include:At least 5 billion people are now covered by at least one of the live-saving MPOWER measures designed to address the worldwide tobacco epidemic, including twenty-nine countries with 832 million people having passed a comprehensive ban on tobacco advertising.Approximately 50 countries, including Barbados, Brunei Darussalam, Chile, France, Hungary, India and Ireland, among others, have charged a tax on sugar-sweetened beverages. Saudi Arabia imposed a tax on tobacco products, energy drinks and soft drinks in 2017. In Bulgaria, companies give women over 58 weeks of maternity leave on average, which is one of the highest in the world. WHO ResponseWHO addresses the wider economic factors impacting on health and health equity, including through workstreams on trade and health, as well as health and development. The WHO Council on the Economics of Health for All has elaborating several opportunities to rethink how value in health and wellbeing is measured, produced, and distributed across the economy. WHO also promotes the use fiscal instruments including taxation policies to invest in and improve health outcomes. Private sector engagement is also addressed through different streams of work, including through the Advisory Group on the Governance of the Private Sector for Universal Health Coverage, as well as through programmatic and treaty approaches such as WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control.WHO has initiated a new programme of action, the Economic and Commercial Determinants of Health, which has four goals: to strengthen the evidence base; develop tools and capacity to address the commercial determinants; convene partnerships and dialogue; and raise awareness and advocacy. The social determinants of health are the conditions in which people are born, grow, work, live, and age, the systems put in place to deal with illness, and the wider set of forces and systems shaping the conditions of daily life. These forces and systems include economic policies and systems, development agendas, social norms, social policies and political systems. Social determinants of health matter because addressing them not only helps prevents illness, but also promotes healthy lives and societal equity.
Commercial determinants of health are a key social determinant, and refer to the conditions, actions and omissions by commercial actors that affect health. Commercial determinants arise in the context of the provision of goods or services for payment and include commercial activities, as well as the environment in which commerce takes place. They can have beneficial or detrimental impacts on health.
Commercial activities shape the physical and social environments in which people are born, grow, work, live and age – both positively and negatively. For example:
However, there are positive contributions by to public health, for example when companies implement the following health interventions:
The workplace also functions as a setting of health promotion and protection against harm, allowing following:
Commercial determinants often disproportionately affect countries and populations that are not profiting from the product or service that causes harm to health or planet, but instead are faced with the burdens of these harms. As a result, they shape health equities, both within and between countries.
Commercial determinants also contribute to other factors that shape health and health equities through broader economic systems and economic determinants. This includes through economic development or trade policies, broader social, economic and political systems, and finance or investment flows. Examples include:income level
Countries with commodity-dependent economies are especially vulnerable, such as Small Island Developing States and least developed countries. They face greater pressure from industry due, for example, to greater employer status or multinational trading agreements.
Recent decades have seen a transfer of resources to private enterprise, which now plays an increasing role in public health policy and regulation and outcomes. The emergence of non-State actors in the geopolitical arena, together with a shift in global governance, are fundamental to understanding the development of commercial determinants of health. Various authors have catalogued pathways of private sector health strategies and impact, including influencing the political environment, the knowledge environment and preference shaping.
There are multiple pathways that commercial actors influence health policy. Companies commonly influence public health through lobbying and party donations. This incentivizes politicians and political parties to align decisions with commercial agendas. Further, some commercial actors work to capture branches of government in order to prevent or weaken regulation of their products and services, leading to unregulated activity, limiting their liability and bypassing the threat of litigation and pre-emption.
To further shape preferences, some companies capture civil society by founding or funding front groups, consumer groups and think tanks, allowing them to manufacture doubt and promote their framings.
Partnering with civil society, adopting so-called best buy strategies and conflict of interest policies and supporting safe spaces for discussions with industry are all examples of how countries can address the commercial determinants of health. More research is needed on the health equity dimensions of commercial determinants of health as well as governance considerations, including transparency and accountability, in addition to state capabilities to avoid corruption and steer private sector engagements. There are clear opportunities to move forward on the commercial determinants, particularly in better understanding and addressing the conflicts of interest but also potential co-benefits of private sector action for better health, at global, national and local levels. The role for transformative partnerships and approaches to achieve the ambitious global health goals was already recognized by the UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development but has been brought to the forefront by COVID-19, with increasing attention on the role the private sector plays in health outcomes both within academia and from civil society. This has led to increased scrutiny on the role of the private sector in health and health equity, as well as increasing initiatives within the private sector itself to position itself as a partner. Examples of actions governments around the world are taking to address commercial determinants to improve public health include:
WHO addresses the wider economic factors impacting on health and health equity, including through workstreams on trade and health, as well as health and development. The WHO Council on the Economics of Health for All has elaborating several opportunities to rethink how value in health and wellbeing is measured, produced, and distributed across the economy. WHO also promotes the use fiscal instruments including taxation policies to invest in and improve health outcomes. Private sector engagement is also addressed through different streams of work, including through the Advisory Group on the Governance of the Private Sector for Universal Health Coverage, as well as through programmatic and treaty approaches such as WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control.
WHO has initiated a new programme of action, the Economic and Commercial Determinants of Health, which has four goals: to strengthen the evidence base; develop tools and capacity to address the commercial determinants; convene partnerships and dialogue; and raise awareness and advocacy. Related
Related health topics:
Fact sheets
Feature stories

========================================
community-based-health-insurance-CBHI
========================================
Key Facts
CBHI is a form of micro health insurance, which is an overarching term for health insurance targeted to low-income people. The specific feature of CBHIs is the community involvement in driving its setup and in its management. Small, voluntary CBHI schemes are generally characterized by the following institutional design features.
Both theory and evidence suggest that the traditional CBHI model – relying only on voluntary, small-scale schemes with little or no subsidization of poor and vulnerable groups – can play only a limited role in helping countries move towards universal health coverage . CBHIs cannot be expected to provide a major source of funding or coverage, and hence can at best provide only a complementary role as part of a national health financing strategy toward UHC. This is partly because people with few health needs tend not to join on a voluntary basis, and there is usually little or no subsidization for poor and other vulnerable groups. Health service utilization rates of members, however, generally increase after enrollment.
Although CBHIs in the traditional model are one way to organize community initiatives, they cannot be expected to provide a major source of funding or coverage. Financial protection arrangements based on mandatory or automatic coverage funded from general government revenue that subsidizes those unable to pay have shown more potential to reach UHC goals than voluntary, contribution-financed schemes. Some countries with CBHI schemes have taken action and transformed their CBHI model towards a national scheme. For countries with established small-scale voluntary CBHI schemes, the government could capitalize on the positive results of improved local governance capacity and public acceptance of prepaid insurance contributions. Here, an option is to integrate or merge existing schemes into a single national pool with decentralized arms or closely interconnected pools beyond the community level. These can provide similar benefit packages and act – with national support – as strategic purchasers of health services, while maintaining local accountability. This could also promote quality gains and efficiency while guaranteeing higher levels of re-distributive capacity and financial protection. In countries where there is no government engagement in CBHI development, governments may focus from the start on developing a national system geared towards universality and envisage to cover the whole population rather than diverting resources and efforts to establishing CBHIs as an interim solution with limited impact on progressing towards UHC.
WHO response WHO supports Member States to develop health financing strategies that aim at reducing fragmentation and better pooling to enhance the potential for re-distributive capacity with the aim to progress towards Universal Health Coverage.
The following institutional design features can be considered critical for a move away from small CBHI schemes towards a national health financing system for UHC: One key approach to reforming CBHIs is to increase the re-distributive capacity of the system. For such a reform to realize its potential, however, it must be set within an overall vision of health financing that aligns pooling with the other health financing functions. Related Links
Community based health insurance: how can it contribute to progress towards UHC? Voluntary health insurance: potentials and limits to moving towards universal health coverageWHO global health expenditure databaseHealth financing country diagnostic: a foundation for national strategy development

========================================
condoms
========================================
Condoms, when used correctly and consistently, are safe and highly effective in preventing transmission of most sexually transmitted infections, including HIV, and unplanned pregnancies. Condoms are safe, inexpensive and widely available. There are both external condoms and internal condoms , which are effective when used correctly. When using a condom, lubricants make it less likely that the condom will break, slip or fall off and can enhance pleasure during sex. This is especially important during anal sex as the rectum, unlike the vagina, does not have natural lubrication. Use of a water- or silicone-based lube is recommended, as other types may cause the condom to break, such as kitchen oil, butter and hand lotion. Lube may also be helpful for individuals who experience vaginal dryness associated with menopause or other skin conditions in the genital area. Condoms are highly efficacious in preventing pregnancy, STIs and HIV. However, the effectiveness of condoms in practice depends on their correct use. The risk of pregnancy or STIs, including HIV, is greatest when condoms are not used correctly with every act of sex. Very few pregnancies or infections occur due to slips or breaks. Condoms significantly reduce the risk of most STIs when used consistently and correctly during vaginal, oral and anal sex. When used correctly with every act of sex, 98% of women whose male partners use male condoms will be protected from unplanned pregnancy; when female condoms are used, 95% of them will be protected against unplanned pregnancy. To assure the effectiveness, condoms need to follow ISO standards and WHO/UNFPA specifications.
Condoms are currently the only available multi-purpose prevention technology against HIV, STIs and unplanned pregnancy. Condom use has been a significant tool to decrease transmission of HIV globally. A modelling study that examined the impact of past and future condom use on the AIDS epidemic in 77 high-burden countries noted that increased condom use since 1990 has averted an estimated 117 million new HIV infections, close to half of them in sub-Saharan Africa and more than one third in Asia and the Pacific (1). In addition, over 300 million unplanned pregnancies are estimated to be prevented each year by using contraceptives, including condoms. WHO’s work on condoms is covered by its overarching mandate to provide technical guidance and support Member States to strengthen programmes related to sexual and reproductive health and rights. This includes both the prevention and control of STIs, including HIV, as well as contraception and family planning services. Condoms are also included in other WHOs programs such as comprehensive sexual education and gender-based violence.
WHO is also 1 of 5 cosponsors of the Human Reproduction Programme , which is the main instrument within the United Nations system for research in human reproduction to identify and address priorities for research to improve sexual and reproductive health.
WHO’s work on controlling the spread of STIs, including HIV, is guided by the Global health sector strategy on HIV, Hepatitis and Sexually Transmitted Infections, 2022–2030. This includes the scale-up primary prevention such as condom availability and use. In addition, WHO supports countries’ efforts to create an encouraging environment allowing individuals to discuss STIs, adopt safer sexual practices, seek treatment and provide accessibility of people-centred quality STI care. WHO also includes condoms use as part of its contraception and family planning portfolios, ensuring that all people have access to their preferred contraceptive methods and the ability to determine if, when and how often to reproduce. This includes producing evidence-based guidelines on the safety and effectiveness of contraceptive methods and their provision, developing quality standards for their manufacture, providing pre-qualification of approved contraceptive commodities and helping countries introduce these methods. In addition, given the recent study showing a decline in condom use among adolescents in Europe, WHO Regional Office for Europe calls upon policy-makers, educators and health-care providers to prioritize adolescent sexual health by offering evidence-based sexuality education in schools, enhancing access to youth-friendly sexual health services, promoting open dialogue to reduce stigma, providing specialized training for educators and health-care providers, and conducting research on factors influencing sexual behaviours, including the impact of social media and online content.
References
Related
Condoms: technical information
Sexual health
Sexually transmitted infections
HIV
Contraception
Global Sexually Transmitted Infections Programme
News
Fact sheets
Feature stories

========================================
birth-defects
========================================
Congenital disorders are also known as congenital abnormalities, congenital malformations or birth defects. They can be defined as structural or functional anomalies that occur during intrauterine life and can be identified prenatally, at birth, or sometimes may only be detected later in infancy, such as hearing defects. Broadly, congenital refers to the existence at or before birth. The proportion of under-5 deaths due to congenital disorders increases as other causes of under-5 deaths are controlled .
Fig 1: Changes in causes of under 5 deaths as under 5 mortality rates decline
Causes and risk factors
Genetic A minority of congenital disorders are caused by genetic abnormalities i.e. chromosomal abnormalities or single gene defects . Consanguinity also increases the prevalence of rare genetic congenital disorders and nearly doubles the risk for neonatal and childhood death, intellectual disability and other anomalies.
Low-income may be an indirect determinant of congenital disorders, with a higher frequency among resource-constrained families and countries. It is estimated that about 94% of severe congenital disorders occur in low- and middle-income countries. An indirect determinant, this higher risk relates to a possible lack of access to sufficient nutritious foods by pregnant women, an increased exposure to agents or factors such as infection and alcohol, or poorer access to health care and screening.
Maternal age is also a risk factor for abnormal intrauterine fetal development. Advanced maternal age increases the risk of chromosomal abnormalities, including Down syndrome.
Environmental factors including infections
Others occur because of environmental factors like maternal infections , exposure to radiation, certain pollutants, maternal nutritional deficiencies , illness or certain drugs . Unknown causes
While complex genetic and environmental interactions are proposed, most congenital disorders have unknown causes, including congenital heart defects, cleft lip or palate and club foot. Prevention
Preventive public health measures work to decrease the frequency of certain congenital disorders through the removal of risk factors or the reinforcement of protective factors. Important interventions and efforts include:
Screening Health care before and near conception includes basic reproductive health practices, as well as medical genetic screening and counselling. Screening can be conducted during the 3 periods listed:
This can be useful to identify those at risk of specific disorders or of passing a disorder onto their children. Screening includes obtaining family histories and carrier screening and is particularly valuable in countries where consanguineous marriage is common.
Maternal characteristics may increase risk, and screening results should be used to offer appropriate care, according to risk. This may include screening for young or advanced maternal age, as well as screening for use of alcohol, tobacco or other risks. Ultrasound can be used to screen for Down syndrome and major structural abnormalities during the first trimester, and for severe fetal anomalies during the second trimester. Maternal blood can be screened for placental markers to aid in prediction of risk of chromosomal abnormalities or neural tube defects, or for free fetal DNA to screen for many chromosomal abnormalities. Diagnostic tests such as chorionic villus sampling and amniocentesis can be used to diagnose chromosomal abnormalities and infections in women at high risk.
Screening of newborns is an important step towards detection. This helps to reduce mortality and morbidity from congenital disorders by facilitating earlier referral and the initiation of medial or surgical treatment.
Early screening for hearing loss provides an opportunity for early correction and allows the possibility of acquiring better language, speech and communication skills. Early screening of newborns for congenital cataract also allows early referral and surgical correction which increases the likelihood of sight.
Newborns may be screened for certain metabolic, hematologic and endocrine disorders, many of which may not have immediately visible effects. The conditions screened for vary by country, depending on prevalence and cost. Newborn screening is increasingly conducted even in low- and middle-income countries. Treatment and care
Some congenital disorders can be treated with medical or surgical interventions. Access to this care may vary by country and by different levels of a health system, though complex care is increasingly available in low- and middle-income settings. Surgery with good follow up care can often mitigate the potential lethality or the morbidity associated with structural congenital disorders. The contribution to reducing mortality and morbidity of this aspect of the treatment is often underestimated. Outcomes are improved with early detection at lower levels of the system through screening, referral and management . Medical treatment for certain metabolic, endocrine and hematological conditions can improve quality of life. A clear example is congenital hypothyroidism, where early detection and treatment allows full physical and mental development to healthy adulthood, whereas a missed diagnosis or unavailability of a simple treatment carries a risk of serious intellectual disability. Children with some types of congenital disorders may require long term support including physical therapy, speech therapy, occupational therapy and support from families and community.
Through the resolution on birth defects of the Sixty-third World Health Assembly , Member States agreed to promote primary prevention and improve the health of children with congenital disorders by:
Together with partners, WHO convenes annual training programmes on the surveillance and prevention of congenital disorders. WHO is also working with partners to provide the required technical expertise for the surveillance of neural tube defects, for monitoring fortification of staple foods with folic acid, and for improving laboratory capacity for assessing risks for folic acid-preventable congenital disorders and is assisting low- and middle-income countries in improving control and elimination of rubella and congenital rubella syndrome through immunization.
WHO develops normative tools, including guidelines and a global plan of action, to strengthen medical care and rehabilitation services to support the implementation of the United Nations convention on the rights of persons with disabilities. Related
Related links
More
PublicationBirth defects surveillance training: facilitator's guideBirth defects surveillance: quick reference handbook of selected congenital anomalies Birth defects surveillance: a manual for programme managers
Publication

========================================
coronavirus-disease-(covid-19
========================================
COVID-19 is the disease caused by the SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus. It usually spreads between people in close contact.
COVID-19 vaccines provide strong protection against severe illness and death. Although a person can still get COVID-19 after vaccination, they are more likely to have mild or no symptoms. Anyone can get sick with COVID-19 and become seriously ill or die, but most people will recover without treatment. People over age 60 and those with existing medical conditions have a higher risk of getting seriously ill. These conditions include high blood pressure, diabetes, obesity, immunosuppression including HIV, cancer and pregnancy. Unvaccinated people also have a higher risk of severe symptoms. People may experience different symptoms from COVID-19. Symptoms usually begin 5–6 days after exposure and last 1–14 days.
The most common symptoms are:
Less common symptoms are:
People with the following symptoms should seek immediate medical attention:
People who have pre-existing health problems are at higher risk when they have COVID-19; they should seek medical help early if worried about their condition. These include people taking immunosuppressive medication; those with chronic heart, lung, liver or rheumatological problems; those with HIV, diabetes, cancer. obesity or dementia.
People with severe disease and those needing hospital treatment should receive treatment as soon as possible. The consequences of severe COVID-19 include death, respiratory failure, sepsis, thromboembolism , and multiorgan failure, including injury of the heart, liver or kidneys.
In rare situations, children can develop a severe inflammatory syndrome a few weeks after infection. Some people who have had COVID-19, whether they have needed hospitalization or not, continue to experience symptoms. These long-term effects are called long COVID . The most common symptoms associated with long COVID include fatigue, breathlessness and cognitive dysfunction . Long COVID can affect a person’s ability to perform daily activities such as work or household chores. Most people will recover without needing treatment in a hospital. For those who need it, doctors will suggest treatments for COVID-19 based on the severity of the disease and the risk of it getting worse. They will consider the person’s age and if they have other health problems.
More on treatment People should get vaccinated as soon as it’s their turn. They should follow local guidance on vaccination and ways to protect themselves against COVID-19.
COVID-19 vaccines provide strong protection against serious illness, hospitalization and death. To prevent the spread of COVID-19:
Vaccination against COVID-19 is based on priority groups such as people aged 60 years and over, and those with underlying medical problems such as high blood pressure, diabetes, chronic health problems, immunosuppression , obesity, cancer, pregnant persons, and unvaccinated people. In March 2023, WHO updated its recommendations on primary series vaccination as well as the need for booster doses. These recommendations are time-limited and can change at any time depending on how the SARS-CoV-2 virus is circulating in your area or country. It is important to stay up to date with local guidelines and recommendations provided by your local health authority. Since its introduction, COVID-19 vaccines have saved millions of lives across the world by providing protection against severe disease, hospitalization, and death. Even though vaccines protect against severe disease and death, it is still possible to spread SARS-CoV-2 to others after being vaccinated. The World Health Organization is the global coordinating agency for the response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Organization works with Member States and partners on all aspects of the pandemic response, including facilitating research, developing guidance, coordinating vaccine development and distribution, and monitoring daily case numbers and trends around the world. Since April 2020, the Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator, launched by WHO and partners, has supported the fastest, most coordinated, and successful global effort in history to develop tools to fight a disease. COVAX, the vaccines pillar of the ACT-Accelerator is a ground-breaking global collaboration to accelerate the development, production, and equitable access to COVID-19 tests, treatments, and vaccines. WHO provides global coordination and member state support on vaccine safety monitoring. It developed the target product profiles for COVID-19 vaccines and provides R&D technical coordination.
WHO also leads work to improve global capacity and access to oxygen production, distribution and supply to patients.
Although WHO announced the end of the emergency phase of COVID-19 in May 2023, the Organization continues to coordinate the global response.
Related
All information on COVID-19
WHO's work on coronavirus disease
News
Fact sheets

========================================
corporal-punishment-and-health
========================================
Corporal or physical punishment is defined by the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, which oversees the Convention on the Rights of the Child, as “any punishment in which physical force is used and intended to cause some degree of pain or discomfort, however light.”
According to the Committee, this mostly involves hitting children with a hand or implement but it can also involve, for example, kicking, shaking or throwing children, scratching, pinching, biting, pulling hair or boxing ears, forcing children to stay in uncomfortable positions, burning, scalding or forced ingestion.
Other non-physical forms of punishment can be cruel and degrading, and thus also incompatible with the Convention, and often accompany and overlap with physical punishment. These include punishments which belittle, humiliate, denigrate, scapegoat, threaten, scare or ridicule the child.
UNICEF’s data from nationally representative surveys in 56 countries 2005–2013 show that approximately 6 out of 10 children aged 2–14 years experienced corporal punishment by adults in their households in the past month. On average, 17% of children experienced severe physical punishment but in some countries this figure exceeds 40%. Large variations across countries and regions show the potential for prevention.
Apart from some countries where rates among boys are higher, results from comparable surveys show that the prevalence of corporal punishment is similar for girls and boys. Young children are as likely, and in some countries more likely, as older children to be exposed to physical punishment, including harsh forms. Physical disciplinary methods are used even with very young children – comparable surveys conducted in 29 countries 2012–2016 show that 3 in 10 children aged 12–23 months are subjected to spanking.
Most children are exposed to both psychological and physical means of punishment. Many parents and caregivers report using non-violent disciplines measures but these are usually used in combination with violent methods. Children who experience only non-violent forms of discipline are in the minority.
One in 2 children aged 6–17 years live in countries where corporal punishment at school is not fully prohibited. Studies have shown that lifetime prevalence of school corporal punishment was above 70% in Africa and Central America, past-year prevalence was above 60% in the WHO Regions of Eastern Mediterranean and South-East Asia, and past-week prevalence was above 40% in Africa and South-East Asia. Lower rates were found in the WHO Western Pacific Region, with lifetime and past year prevalence around 25%. Physical punishment appeared to be highly prevalent at both primary and secondary school levels.
Corporal punishment triggers harmful psychological and physiological responses. Children not only experience pain, sadness, fear, anger, shame and guilt, but feeling threatened also leads to physiological stress and the activation of neural pathways that support dealing with danger. Children who have been physically punished tend to exhibit high hormonal reactivity to stress, overloaded biological systems, including the nervous, cardiovascular and nutritional systems, and changes in brain structure and function.
Despite its widespread acceptability, spanking is also linked to atypical brain function like that of more severe abuse, thereby undermining the frequently cited argument that less severe forms of physical punishment are not harmful. A large body of research shows links between corporal punishment and a wide range of negative outcomes, both immediate and long-term:
There is some evidence of a dose–response relationship, with studies finding that the association with child aggression and lower achievement in mathematics and reading ability became stronger as the frequency of corporal punishment increased.
There are few differences in prevalence of corporal punishment by sex or age, although in some places boys and younger children are more at risk. Children with disabilities are more likely to be physically punished than those without disabilities. Parents who were physically punished as children are more likely to physically punish their own children.
In most of the countries with data, children from wealthier households are equally likely to experience violent discipline as those from poorer households. In contrast, in some resource-poor settings, especially where education systems have undergone rapid expansion, the strain on teachers resulting from the limited human and physical resources may lead to a greater use of corporal punishment in the classroom.
The INSPIRE technical package presents several effective and promising interventions, including:
The earlier such interventions occur in children's lives, the greater the benefits to the child and to society .
WHO addresses corporal punishment in multiple cross-cutting ways. In collaboration with partners, WHO provides guidance and technical support for evidence-based prevention and response. Work on several strategies from the INSPIRE technical package, including those on legislation, norms and values, parenting, and school-based violence prevention, contribute to preventing physical punishment. The Global status report on violence against children 2020 monitors countries’ progress in implementing legislation and programmes that help reduce it. WHO also advocates for increased international support for and investment in these evidence-based prevention and response efforts.
Related
News
Fact sheets
Feature stories
Commentaries
More
Global Partnership to End Violence Against ChildrenInternational Society for the Prevention of Child Abuse and NeglectViolence Against Children – UNICEF Data

========================================
crimean-congo-haemorrhagic-fever
========================================
Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever is a widespread disease caused by a tick-borne virus of the Bunyaviridae family. The CCHF virus causes severe viral haemorrhagic fever outbreaks, with a case fatality rate of 10–40%. CCHF is endemic in Africa, the Balkans, the Middle East and Asian countries south of the 50th parallel north – the geographical limit of the principal tick vector. The hosts of the CCHF virus include a wide range of wild and domestic animals such as cattle, sheep and goats. Many birds are resistant to infection, but ostriches are susceptible and may show a high prevalence of infection in endemic areas, where they have been at the origin of human cases. For example, a former outbreak occurred at an ostrich abattoir in South Africa. There is no apparent disease in these animals.
Animals become infected by the bite of infected ticks and the virus remains in their bloodstream for about one week after infection, allowing the tick-animal-tick cycle to continue when another tick bites. Although a number of tick genera are capable of becoming infected with CCHF virus, ticks of the genus Hyalomma are the principal vector.
The CCHF virus is transmitted to people either by tick bites or through contact with infected animal blood or tissues during and immediately after slaughter. The majority of cases have occurred in people involved in the livestock industry, such as agricultural workers, slaughterhouse workers and veterinarians.
Human-to-human transmission can occur resulting from close contact with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected persons. Hospital-acquired infections can also occur due to improper sterilization of medical equipment, reuse of needles and contamination of medical supplies.
The length of the incubation period depends on the mode of acquisition of the virus. Following infection by a tick bite, the incubation period is usually one to three days, with a maximum of nine days. The incubation period following contact with infected blood or tissues is usually five to six days, with a documented maximum of 13 days. Onset of symptoms is sudden, with fever, myalgia, , dizziness, neck pain and stiffness, backache, headache, sore eyes and photophobia . There may be nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, abdominal pain and sore throat early on, followed by sharp mood swings and confusion. After two to four days, the agitation may be replaced by sleepiness, depression and lassitude, and the abdominal pain may localize to the upper right quadrant, with detectable hepatomegaly . Other clinical signs include tachycardia , lymphadenopathy , and a petechial rash on internal mucosal surfaces, such as in the mouth and throat, and on the skin. The petechiae may give way to larger rashes called ecchymoses, and other haemorrhagic phenomena. There is usually evidence of hepatitis, and severely ill patients may experience rapid kidney deterioration, sudden liver failure or pulmonary failure after the fifth day of illness. The mortality rate from CCHF is approximately 30%, with death occurring in the second week of illness. In patients who recover, improvement generally begins on the ninth or tenth day after the onset of illness. CCHF virus infection can be diagnosed by several different laboratory tests:
Patients with fatal disease, as well as in patients in the first few days of illness, do not usually develop a measurable antibody response and so diagnosis in these individuals is achieved by virus or RNA detection in blood or tissue samples. Tests on patient samples present an extreme biohazard risk and should only be conducted under maximum biological containment conditions. However, if samples have been inactivated , they can be manipulated in a basic biosafety environment. Early intensive supportive care including fluid management and treatment of specific symptoms, can improve survival chance.
There is currently no specific treatment approved for Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever. The antiviral drug ribavirin has been given off label as treatment; however, there is currently considerable uncertainties about its efficacy on the outcome of patients with CCHF given the lack of clinical evidence, as well as on its optimal dosing regimens. Whenever possible, if the decision is to use ribavirin to treat patients, they must be enrolled into a randomized clinical trial with ribavirin or other investigational therapeutics to assess clinical outcomes and safety.
Ticks of the genus Hyalomma are the principal vector of Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever. Photo: Robert Swanepoel/NICD South Africa
It is difficult to prevent or control CCHF infection in animals and ticks as the tick-animal-tick cycle usually goes unnoticed and the infection in domestic animals is usually not apparent. Furthermore, the tick vectors are numerous and widespread, so tick control with acaricides is only a realistic option for well-managed livestock production facilities. For example, following an outbreak at an ostrich abattoir in South Africa , measures were taken to ensure that ostriches remained tick free for 14 days in a quarantine station before slaughter. This decreased the risk for the animal to be infected during its slaughtering and prevented human infection for those in contact with the livestock.
There are no vaccines available for use in animals.
Although an inactivated, mouse brain-derived vaccine against CCHF has been developed and used on a small scale in eastern Europe, there is currently no safe and effective vaccine widely available for human use.
In the absence of a vaccine, the only way to reduce infection in people is by raising awareness of the risk factors and educating people about the measures they can take to reduce exposure to the virus.
Public health advice should focus on several aspects.
Health-care workers caring for patients with suspected or confirmed CCHF, or handling specimens from them, should implement standard infection control precautions. These include basic hand hygiene, use of personal protective equipment, safe injection practices and safe burial practices. As a precautionary measure, health-care workers caring for patients immediately outside the CCHF outbreak area should also implement standard infection control precautions. Samples taken from people with suspected CCHF should be handled by trained staff working in suitably equipped laboratories.
Recommendations for infection control while providing care to patients with suspected or confirmed Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever should follow those developed by WHO for Ebola and Marburg haemorrhagic fever.
WHO is working with partners to support CCHF surveillance, diagnostic capacity and outbreak response activities in Europe, the Middle East, Asia and Africa.
WHO also provides documentation to help disease investigation and control, and has created an aide–memoire on standard precautions in health care, which is intended to reduce the risk of transmission of bloodborne and other pathogens. Related
Related links
News
Documents

========================================
Deafness and hearing loss
========================================
Over 5% of the world’s population – or 430 million people – require rehabilitation to address their disabling hearing loss . It is estimated that by 2050 over 700 million people – or 1 in every 10 people – will have disabling hearing loss.
Disabling hearing loss refers to hearing loss greater than 35 decibels (dB) in the better hearing ear. Nearly 80% of people with disabling hearing loss live in low- and middle-income countries. The prevalence of hearing loss increases with age, among those older than 60 years, over 25% are affected by disabling hearing loss.
A person who is not able to hear as well as someone with normal hearing – hearing thresholds of 20 dB or better in both ears – is said to have hearing loss. Hearing loss may be mild, moderate, moderately severe, severe or profound. It can affect one ear or both ears and leads to difficulty in hearing conversational speech or loud sounds.
Hard of hearing refers to people with hearing loss ranging from mild to severe. People who are hard of hearing usually communicate through spoken language and can benefit from hearing aids, cochlear implants, and other assistive devices as well as captioning.
Deaf people mostly have profound hearing loss, which implies very little or no hearing. They can benefit from cochlear implants. Some of them use sign language for communication.
Although these factors can be encountered at different periods across the life span, individuals are most susceptible to their effects during critical periods in life. When unaddressed, hearing loss impacts many aspects of life at individual level:
Many of the causes that lead to hearing loss can be avoided through public health strategies and clinical interventions implemented across the life course. Prevention of hearing loss is essential throughout the life course, from prenatal and perinatal periods to older age. In children, nearly 60% of hearing loss is due to avoidable causes that can be prevented through implementation of public health measures. Likewise, most common causes of hearing loss in adults, such as exposure to loud sounds and ototoxic medicines, are preventable.
Effective strategies for reducing hearing loss at different stages of the life course include: Early identification of hearing loss and ear diseases is key to effective management.
This requires systematic screening for detection of hearing loss and related ear diseases in those who are most at risk. This includes: Hearing assessment and ear examination can be conducted in clinical and community settings. Tools such as the hearWHO app and other technology-based solutions make it possible to screen for ear diseases and hearing loss with limited training and resources. Once hearing loss is identified, it is essential that it is addressed as early as possible and in an appropriate manner, to mitigate any adverse impact. Rehabilitation helps people with hearing loss to function at their optimum, which means they can be as independent as possible in everyday activities. Specifically, rehabilitation helps them to participate in education, work, recreation and meaningful roles, for example in their families or communities, throughout their lives. Interventions for rehabilitation for people with hearing loss include: WHO’s work on ear and hearing care is to promote integrated people-centred ear and hearing care .
WHO’s work is guided by the recommendations of the WHO World report on hearing and the World Health Assembly resolution on prevention of deafness and hearing loss. WHO’s work includes:
Related
News
Fact sheets
More
Questions and answers on tinnitus Questions and answers on tinnitus

========================================
deliberate-events
========================================
Key factsDeliberate events are malicious acts with the intention to cause harm. The scope includes traditional chemical, biological and radio-nuclear agents and emerging threats such as cyber-attacks and dis-information campaigns. DEs may be announced or occur covertly with uncertainty or ambiguity as to the cause or whether the cause was deliberate. The scale of consequence of DEs could vary widely – from DEs aimed at individuals or small groups of people with minor or major impacts to DEs that cause mass casualties and cascading consequences of potentially public health emergencies of international concern.Addressing DEs involves both health and security dimensions. When a DE is suspected, response efforts will have to balance medical, public health, epidemiological and humanitarian response efforts with criminal and forensic investigations involving national and/or international authorities across multiple agencies, requiring coordination across a range of actors, resources and capacities.The Biological Weapons Convention prohibits the development, production, acquisition, transfer, stockpiling and use of biological and toxin weapons.OverviewDeliberate events are malicious acts with the intention to cause harm to the target. Traditionally, DEs involve the release or use of hazardous substances such as chemicals, biological agents, toxins or radio-nuclear materials , while emerging threats include disinformation, misuse of digital, cyber means and other new technologies. DEs can occur on a small scale, for example poisoning an individual, or a large scale, such as the release of CBRN material to kill, make sick, or injure large populations, initiate larger scale epidemics, or severely damage the environment. A disinformation campaign may accompany DEs to create fear, panic, distrust, discrimination and psychological trauma.Risks and impactsDEs involve both health and security dimensions. In conflict or war, key health infrastructure or CBRN facilities can be deliberately damaged, contaminated or destroyed with widespread consequences. Geopolitical shifts and conflicts create new circumstances for DEs. In addition to these traditional agents, emerging threats include disinformation and the misuse of cyber and technology means, with direct or indirect consequences on human health . Scientific advances and access to technological and digital tools have increased the potential risks of high-consequence DEs. Atomic science is known as a typical example of a so-called double-edged sword; something that has or can have both favourable and unfavourable consequences. For example, nuclear power can be used for sustainable and large-scale energy production or nuclear weapons of mass destruction. This is also true for health and life science research, which is sometimes known as dual-use research of concern . For example, while understanding key characteristics of microorganisms will help prevention and control of infectious diseases, application of gene editing and reconstruction science can lead to a new and disastrous pathogen. The public health, economic and national security consequences from DEs have made it necessary for governments to seek to prevent such use, to have the means of detecting such events and to prepare for and be ready to respond to them. These efforts should be developed as an integral part of existing national emergency and public health plans.Uncertainty about exposure to a deliberately released agent is likely to increase fear, anxiety and panic amongst the general public. Preparedness, training and education, risk communication and debriefing aimed at mitigating psychological consequences are important to consider for ensuring the mental health of front-line workers and affected populations.WHO responseDuring an evolving situation of suspected or confirmed DE, WHO works within its mandate to coordinate the international public health response and provide its support to the affected and at-risk Member States upon request. WHO does not have a mandate to lead nor to participate in investigations in response to a potential DE. However WHO may collaborate with and support other entities or mechanisms, such as the United Nations Secretary-General’s Mechanism for Investigation of Alleged Use of Chemical and Biological Weapons , which is mandated to carry out prompt investigations in response to allegations of the possible use of chemical and bacteriological and toxin weapons.WHO’s response to DE includes: working with international or national organizations and laboratories to characterize the nature, scope, and impact of the DE;offering targeted training to public health and front-line responders;facilitating the identification and acquisition of necessary response materials and providing medical countermeasures in certain circumstances;developing context-specific guidance and training material to the substance in question; andguiding and coordinating national, regional and global responses with specific partners. Depending on the scale and nature of the DE, WHO could also request additional international expert support through the Global Outbreak and Response Network , WHO Collaborating Centres, the UN Humanitarian Emergency Cluster system, Standby Partners and other networks as needed.WHO proposes to strengthen preparedness for DEs as an integral part of existing national emergency and public health plans. WHO promotes an all-hazard approach and the core capacity development of Member States for prevention and response to events of concern and public health emergencies regardless of natural, accidental or deliberate nature. Specifically as preparedness and readiness considering DE, it is essential to ensure awareness among the national stakeholders about potential risks, and to establish communication particularly between the health and the security sectors, known as Health-Security Interface. Furthermore, WHO works on strengthening inter-agency preparedness for and response to biorisk. Together with the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs , WHO co-leads the UN Biorisk Working Group , which brings together 30 member organizations seeking to harmonize and coordinate policy, normative and technical expertise to increase the international community's capacity to address biorisks effectively. Deliberate events are malicious acts with the intention to cause harm to the target. Traditionally, DEs involve the release or use of hazardous substances such as chemicals, biological agents, toxins or radio-nuclear materials , while emerging threats include disinformation, misuse of digital, cyber means and other new technologies. DEs can occur on a small scale, for example poisoning an individual, or a large scale, such as the release of CBRN material to kill, make sick, or injure large populations, initiate larger scale epidemics, or severely damage the environment. A disinformation campaign may accompany DEs to create fear, panic, distrust, discrimination and psychological trauma.
DEs involve both health and security dimensions. In conflict or war, key health infrastructure or CBRN facilities can be deliberately damaged, contaminated or destroyed with widespread consequences. Geopolitical shifts and conflicts create new circumstances for DEs. In addition to these traditional agents, emerging threats include disinformation and the misuse of cyber and technology means, with direct or indirect consequences on human health . Scientific advances and access to technological and digital tools have increased the potential risks of high-consequence DEs. Atomic science is known as a typical example of a so-called double-edged sword; something that has or can have both favourable and unfavourable consequences. For example, nuclear power can be used for sustainable and large-scale energy production or nuclear weapons of mass destruction. This is also true for health and life science research, which is sometimes known as dual-use research of concern . For example, while understanding key characteristics of microorganisms will help prevention and control of infectious diseases, application of gene editing and reconstruction science can lead to a new and disastrous pathogen. The public health, economic and national security consequences from DEs have made it necessary for governments to seek to prevent such use, to have the means of detecting such events and to prepare for and be ready to respond to them. These efforts should be developed as an integral part of existing national emergency and public health plans.
Uncertainty about exposure to a deliberately released agent is likely to increase fear, anxiety and panic amongst the general public. Preparedness, training and education, risk communication and debriefing aimed at mitigating psychological consequences are important to consider for ensuring the mental health of front-line workers and affected populations.
During an evolving situation of suspected or confirmed DE, WHO works within its mandate to coordinate the international public health response and provide its support to the affected and at-risk Member States upon request. WHO does not have a mandate to lead nor to participate in investigations in response to a potential DE. However WHO may collaborate with and support other entities or mechanisms, such as the United Nations Secretary-General’s Mechanism for Investigation of Alleged Use of Chemical and Biological Weapons , which is mandated to carry out prompt investigations in response to allegations of the possible use of chemical and bacteriological and toxin weapons.
WHO’s response to DE includes: Depending on the scale and nature of the DE, WHO could also request additional international expert support through the Global Outbreak and Response Network , WHO Collaborating Centres, the UN Humanitarian Emergency Cluster system, Standby Partners and other networks as needed.
WHO proposes to strengthen preparedness for DEs as an integral part of existing national emergency and public health plans. WHO promotes an all-hazard approach and the core capacity development of Member States for prevention and response to events of concern and public health emergencies regardless of natural, accidental or deliberate nature. Specifically as preparedness and readiness considering DE, it is essential to ensure awareness among the national stakeholders about potential risks, and to establish communication particularly between the health and the security sectors, known as Health-Security Interface. Furthermore, WHO works on strengthening inter-agency preparedness for and response to biorisk. Together with the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs , WHO co-leads the UN Biorisk Working Group , which brings together 30 member organizations seeking to harmonize and coordinate policy, normative and technical expertise to increase the international community's capacity to address biorisks effectively.
Related
News
More
Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network FAO/WHO International Food Safety Authorities Network Public Health Emergency Operations Centre Network CheminetRadiation Emergency Medical Preparedness and Assistance NetworkBioDoseNetHealth-Security Interface Technical Advisory Group

========================================
dementia
========================================
Dementia is a term for several diseases that affect memory, thinking, and the ability to perform daily activities. The illness gets worse over time. It mainly affects older people but not all people will get it as they age.
Things that increase the risk of developing dementia include:
Dementia is a syndrome that can be caused by a number of diseases which over time destroy nerve cells and damage the brain, typically leading to deterioration in cognitive function beyond what might be expected from the usual consequences of biological ageing. While consciousness is not affected, the impairment in cognitive function is commonly accompanied, and occasionally preceded, by changes in mood, emotional control, behaviour, or motivation.
Dementia has physical, psychological, social and economic impacts, not only for people living with dementia, but also for their carers, families and society at large. There is often a lack of awareness and understanding of dementia, resulting in stigmatization and barriers to diagnosis and care.
Changes in mood and behaviour sometimes happen even before memory problems occur. Symptoms get worse over time. Eventually, most people with dementia will need others to help with daily activities. Early signs and symptoms are:
Common changes in mood and behaviour include:
Dementia affects each person in a different way, depending upon the underlying causes, other health conditions and the person’s cognitive functioning before becoming ill. Most symptoms become worse over time, while others might disappear or only occur in the later stages of dementia. As the disease progresses, the need for help with personal care increases. People with dementia may not be able to recognize family members or friends, develop difficulties moving around, lose control over their bladder and bowls, have trouble eating and drinking and experience behaviour changes such as aggression that are distressing to the person with dementia as well as those around them.
Dementia is caused by many different diseases or injuries that directly and indirectly damage the brain. Alzheimer disease is the most common form and may contribute to 60–70% of cases. Other forms include vascular dementia, dementia with Lewy bodies , and a group of diseases that contribute to frontotemporal dementia . Dementia may also develop after a stroke or in the context of certain infections such as HIV, as a result of harmful use of alcohol, repetitive physical injuries to the brain or nutritional deficiencies. The boundaries between different forms of dementia are indistinct and mixed forms often co-exist.
There is no cure for dementia, but a lot can be done to support both people living with the illness and those who care for them.
People with dementia can take steps to maintain their quality of life and promote their well-being by: In addition, some medications can help manage dementia symptoms:
If people living with dementia are at risk of hurting themselves or others, medicines like haloperidol and risperidone can help, but these should never be used as the first treatment
For those diagnosed with dementia, there are things that can help manage symptoms:
Plan ahead of time. Over time, it may be harder to make important decisions for yourself or your finances:
It is important to recognize that providing care and support for a person living with dementia can be challenging, impacting the carer’s own health and well-being. As someone supporting a person living with dementia, reach out to family members, friends, and professionals for help. Take regular breaks and look after yourself. Try stress management techniques such as mindfulness-based exercises and seek professional help and guidance if needed.
Although age is the strongest known risk factor for dementia, it is not an inevitable consequence of biological ageing. Further, dementia does not exclusively affect older people – young onset dementia accounts for up to 9% of cases. Studies show that people can reduce their risk of cognitive decline and dementia by being physically active, not smoking, avoiding harmful use of alcohol, controlling their weight, eating a healthy diet, and maintaining healthy blood pressure, cholesterol and blood sugar levels. Additional risk factors include depression, social isolation, low educational attainment, cognitive inactivity and air pollution.
Unfortunately, people living with dementia are frequently denied the basic rights and freedoms available to others. In many countries, physical and chemical restraints are used extensively in care homes for older people and in acute-care settings, even when regulations are in place to uphold the rights of people to freedom and choice.
An appropriate and supportive legislative environment based on internationally-accepted human rights standards is required to ensure the highest quality of care for people with dementia and their carers.
WHO recognizes dementia as a public health priority. In May 2017, the World Health Assembly endorsed the Global action plan on the public health response to dementia 2017-2025. The Plan provides a comprehensive blueprint for action – for policy-makers, international, regional and national partners, and WHO in the following areas: addressing dementia as a public health priority; increasing awareness of dementia and creating a dementia-inclusive society; reducing the risk of dementia; diagnosis, treatment and care; information systems for dementia; support for dementia carers; and, research and innovation
To facilitate the monitoring of the global dementia action plan, WHO developed the Global Dementia Observatory , a data portal that collates country data on 35 key dementia indicators across the global action plan’s seven strategic areas. As a complement to the GDO, WHO launched the GDO Knowledge Exchange Platform, which is a repository of good practices examples in the area of dementia with the goal of fostering mutual learning and multi-directional exchange between regions, countries and individuals to facilitate action globally.
Related
Global action plan on the public health response to dementia 2017 - 2025View publication
News

========================================
dengue-and-severe-dengue
========================================
Dengue is a viral infection that spreads from mosquitoes to people. It is more common in tropical and subtropical climates.
Most people who get dengue will not have symptoms. But for those who do, the most common symptoms are high fever, headache, body aches, nausea, and rash. Most will get better in 1–2 weeks. Some people develop severe dengue and need care in a hospital. In severe cases, dengue can be fatal. You can lower your risk of dengue by avoiding mosquito bites especially during the day.
Dengue is treated with pain medicine as there is no specific treatment currently.
Most people with dengue have mild or no symptoms and will get better in 1–2 weeks. Rarely, dengue can be severe and lead to death. If symptoms occur, they usually begin 4–10 days after infection and last for 2–7 days. Symptoms may include:
Individuals who are infected for the second time are at greater risk of severe dengue.
Severe dengue symptoms often come after the fever has gone away:
People with these severe symptoms should get care right away. After recovery, people who have had dengue may feel tired for several weeks.
There is no specific treatment for dengue. The focus is on treating pain symptoms. Most cases of dengue fever can be treated at home with pain medicine.
Acetaminophen is often used to control pain. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs like ibuprofen and aspirin are avoided as they can increase the risk of bleeding.
For people with severe dengue, hospitalization is often needed.
The incidence of dengue has grown dramatically around the world in recent decades, with cases reported to WHO increasing from 505 430 cases in 2000 to 5.2 million in 2019. A vast majority of cases are asymptomatic or mild and self-managed, and hence the actual numbers of dengue cases are under-reported. Many cases are also misdiagnosed as other febrile illnesses (1). The highest number of dengue cases was recorded in 2023, affecting over 80 countries in all regions of WHO. Since the beginning of 2023 ongoing transmission, combined with an unexpected spike in dengue cases, resulted in a historic high of over 6.5 million cases and more than 7300 dengue-related deaths reported. Several factors are associated with the increasing risk of spread of the dengue epidemic: the changing distribution of the vectors , especially in previously dengue naïve countries; the consequences of El Niño phenomena in 2023 and climate change leading to increasing temperatures and high rainfall and humidity; fragile health systems in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic; and political and financial instabilities in countries facing complex humanitarian crises and high population movements. One modelling estimate indicates 390 million dengue virus infections per year of which 96 million manifest clinically (2). Another study on the prevalence of dengue estimates that 3.9 billion people are at risk of infection with dengue viruses (3).
The disease is now endemic in more than 100 countries in the WHO Regions of Africa, the Americas, the Eastern Mediterranean, South-East Asia and the Western Pacific. The Americas, South-East Asia and Western Pacific regions are the most seriously affected, with Asia representing around 70% of the global disease burden.
Dengue is spreading to new areas in Europe, the Eastern Mediterranean and South America. The largest number of dengue cases reported was in 2023. The WHO Region of the Americas reported 4.5 million cases, with 2300 deaths. A high number of cases were reported in Asia: Bangladesh , Malaysia , Thailand , and Viet Nam .
Transmission through the mosquito bite
The dengue virus is transmitted to humans through the bites of infected female mosquitoes, primarily the Aedes aegypti mosquito. Other species within the Aedes genus can also act as vectors, but their contribution is normally secondary to Aedes aegypti. However, in 2023, a surge in local transmission of dengue by Aedes albopictus has been seen in Europe. After feeding on a infected person, the virus replicates in the mosquito midgut before disseminating to secondary tissues, including the salivary glands. The time it takes from ingesting the virus to actual transmission to a new host is termed the extrinsic incubation period . The EIP takes about 8–12 days when the ambient temperature is between 25–28°C. Variations in the extrinsic incubation period are not only influenced by ambient temperature; several factors such as the magnitude of daily temperature fluctuations, virus genotype, and initial viral concentration can also alter the time it takes for a mosquito to transmit the virus. Once infectious, the mosquito can transmit the virus for the rest of its life.
Human-to-mosquito transmission
Mosquitoes can become infected by people who are viremic with the dengue virus. This can be someone who has a symptomatic dengue infection, someone who is yet to have a symptomatic infection , and also someone who shows no signs of illness .
Human-to-mosquito transmission can occur up to 2 days before someone shows symptoms of the illness, and up to 2 days after the fever has resolved.
The risk of mosquito infection is positively associated with high viremia and high fever in the patient; conversely, high levels of DENV-specific antibodies are associated with a decreased risk of mosquito infection. Most people are viremic for about 4–5 days, but viremia can last as long as 12 days.
Maternal transmission
The primary mode of transmission of the dengue virus between humans involves mosquito vectors. There is evidence however, of the possibility of maternal transmission . At the same time, vertical transmission rates appear low, with the risk of vertical transmission seemingly linked to the timing of the dengue infection during the pregnancy. When a mother does have a dengue infection when she is pregnant, babies may suffer from pre-term birth, low birthweight, and fetal distress.
Other transmission modes
Rare cases of transmission via blood products, organ donation and transfusions have been recorded. Similarly, transovarial transmission of the virus within mosquitoes have also been recorded. Previous infection with DENV increases the risk of the individual developing severe dengue.
Urbanization , is associated with dengue transmission through multiple social and environmental factors: population density, human mobility, access to reliable water source, water storage practice etc.
Community risks to dengue also depend on a population’s knowledge, attitude and practice towards dengue, as the exposure is closely related to behaviours such as water storage, plant keeping, and self-protection against mosquito bites. Routine vector surveillance and control activities engaging community greatly enhances a community’s resilience. Vectors might adapt to new environments and climate. The interaction between dengue virus, the host and the environment is dynamic. Consequently, disease risks may change and shift with climate change in tropical and subtropical areas, in combination with increased urbanization and movement of populations.
The mosquitoes that spread dengue are active during the day. Lower the risk of getting dengue by protecting yourself from mosquito bites by using: Mosquito breeding can be prevented by:
If you get dengue, it’s important to:
So far one vaccine has been approved and licensed in some countries. However, it is recommended only for the age group of 6 to 16 years in high transmission settings. Several additional vaccines are under evaluation.
WHO responds to dengue in the following ways:
References
Related
News
Fact sheets
Feature stories

========================================
depression
========================================
Depressive disorder is a common mental disorder. It involves a depressed mood or loss of pleasure or interest in activities for long periods of time.
Depression is different from regular mood changes and feelings about everyday life. It can affect all aspects of life, including relationships with family, friends and community. It can result from or lead to problems at school and at work.
Depression can happen to anyone. People who have lived through abuse, severe losses or other stressful events are more likely to develop depression. Women are more likely to have depression than men.
An estimated 3.8% of the population experience depression, including 5% of adults , and 5.7% of adults older than 60 years. Approximately 280 million people in the world have depression (1). Depression is about 50% more common among women than among men. Worldwide, more than 10% of pregnant women and women who have just given birth experience depression (2). More than 700 000 people die due to suicide every year. Suicide is the fourth leading cause of death in 15–29-year-olds.
Although there are known, effective treatments for mental disorders, more than 75% of people in low- and middle-income countries receive no treatment (3). Barriers to effective care include a lack of investment in mental health care, lack of trained health-care providers and social stigma associated with mental disorders. During a depressive episode, a person experiences a depressed mood . They may feel a loss of pleasure or interest in activities.
A depressive episode is different from regular mood fluctuations. They last most of the day, nearly every day, for at least two weeks.
Other symptoms are also present, which may include:
Depression can cause difficulties in all aspects of life, including in the community and at home, work and school.
A depressive episode can be categorized as mild, moderate, or severe depending on the number and severity of symptoms, as well as the impact on the individual’s functioning. There are different patterns of depressive episodes including:
Depression results from a complex interaction of social, psychological, and biological factors. People who have gone through adverse life events are more likely to develop depression. Depression can, in turn, lead to more stress and dysfunction and worsen the affected person’s life situation and the depression itself.
Depression is closely related to and affected by physical health. Many of the factors that influence depression are also known risk factors for diseases such as cardiovascular disease, cancer, diabetes and respiratory diseases. In turn, people with these diseases may also find themselves experiencing depression due to the difficulties associated with managing their condition.
Prevention programmes have been shown to reduce depression. Effective community approaches to prevent depression include school-based programmes to enhance a pattern of positive coping in children and adolescents. Interventions for parents of children with behavioural problems may reduce parental depressive symptoms and improve outcomes for their children. Exercise programmes for older persons can also be effective in depression prevention.
There are effective treatments for depression. These include psychological treatment and medications. Seek care if you have symptoms of depression.
Psychological treatments are the first treatments for depression. They can be combined with antidepressant medications in moderate and severe depression. Antidepressant medications are not needed for mild depression.
Psychological treatments can teach new ways of thinking, coping or relating to others. They may include talk therapy with professionals and supervised lay therapists. Talk therapy can happen in person or online. Psychological treatments may be accessed through self-help manuals, websites and apps. Effective psychological treatments for depression include: Antidepressant medications include selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors , such as fluoxetine.
Health-care providers should keep in mind the possible adverse effects associated with antidepressant medication, the ability to deliver either intervention , and individual preferences. Antidepressants should not be used for treating depression in children and are not the first line of treatment in adolescents, among whom they should be used with extra caution.
Different medications and treatments are used for bipolar disorder. Self-care can play an important role in managing symptoms of depression and promoting overall well-being.
What you can do:
If you have thoughts of suicide:
If you think you are in immediate danger of harming yourself, contact any available emergency services or a crisis line.
WHO’s Mental health action plan 2013–2030 highlights the steps required to provide appropriate interventions for people with mental disorders including depression. Depression and self-harm/suicide are among the priority conditions covered by WHO’s Mental Health Gap Action Programme . The Programme aims to help countries increase services for people with mental, neurological and substance use disorders through care provided by health workers who are not specialists in mental health. WHO has developed brief psychological intervention manuals for depression that may be delivered by lay therapists to individuals and groups. An example is the Problem management plus manual, which describes the use of behavioural activation, stress management, problem solving treatment and strengthening social support. Moreover, the Group interpersonal therapy for depression manual describes group treatment of depression. Finally, the Thinking healthy manual covers the use of cognitive-behavioural therapy for perinatal depression.
References
Related
Mental Health Gap Action Programme More on depression Videos
Fact sheets
More

========================================
diabetes
========================================
In 2022, 14% of adults aged 18 years and older were living with diabetes, an increase from 7% in 1990. More than half of adults aged 30 years and over living with diabetes were not taking medication for their diabetes in 2022. Diabetes treatment coverage was lowest in low- and middle-income countries.
In 2021, diabetes was the direct cause of 1.6 million deaths and 47% of all deaths due to diabetes occurred before the age of 70 years. Another 530 000 kidney disease deaths were caused by diabetes, and high blood glucose causes around 11% of cardiovascular deaths (1).
Since 2000, mortality rates from diabetes have been increasing. By contrast, the probability of dying from any one of the four main noncommunicable diseases between the ages of 30 and 70 decreased by 20% globally between 2000 and 2019. Symptoms of diabetes may occur suddenly. In type 2 diabetes, the symptoms can be mild and may take many years to be noticed.
Symptoms of diabetes include: Over time, diabetes can damage blood vessels in the heart, eyes, kidneys and nerves.
People with diabetes have a higher risk of health problems including heart attack, stroke and kidney failure.
Diabetes can cause permanent vision loss by damaging blood vessels in the eyes.
Many people with diabetes develop problems with their feet from nerve damage and poor blood flow. This can cause foot ulcers and may lead to amputation.
Type 1 diabetes is characterized by deficient insulin production and requires daily administration of insulin. In 2017 there were 9 million people with type 1 diabetes; the majority of them live in high-income countries. Neither its cause nor the means to prevent it are known.
Type 2 diabetes affects how your body uses sugar for energy. It stops the body from using insulin properly, which can lead to high levels of blood sugar if not treated. Over time, type 2 diabetes can cause serious damage to the body, especially nerves and blood vessels.
Type 2 diabetes is often preventable. Factors that contribute to developing type 2 diabetes include being overweight, not getting enough exercise, and genetics. Early diagnosis is important to prevent the worst effects of type 2 diabetes. The best way to detect diabetes early is to get regular check-ups and blood tests with a healthcare provider. Symptoms of type 2 diabetes can be mild. They may take several years to be noticed. Symptoms may be similar to those of type 1 diabetes but are often less marked. As a result, the disease may be diagnosed several years after onset, after complications have already arisen.
More than 95% of people with diabetes have type 2 diabetes. Type 2 diabetes was formerly called non-insulin dependent, or adult onset. Until recently, this type of diabetes was seen only in adults but it is now also occurring increasingly frequently in children.
Gestational diabetes is hyperglycaemia with blood glucose values above normal but below those diagnostic of diabetes. Gestational diabetes occurs during pregnancy.
Women with gestational diabetes are at an increased risk of complications during pregnancy and at delivery. These women and possibly their children are also at increased risk of type 2 diabetes in the future.
Gestational diabetes is diagnosed through prenatal screening, rather than through reported symptoms.
Impaired glucose tolerance and impaired fasting glycaemia are intermediate conditions in the transition between normality and diabetes. People with IGT or IFG are at high risk of progressing to type 2 diabetes, although this is not inevitable.
Lifestyle changes are the best way to prevent or delay the onset of type 2 diabetes.
To help prevent type 2 diabetes and its complications, people should: Early diagnosis can be accomplished through relatively inexpensive testing of blood glucose. People with type 1 diabetes need insulin injections for survival.
One of the most important ways to treat diabetes is to keep a healthy lifestyle. Some people with type 2 diabetes will need to take medicines to help manage their blood sugar levels. These can include insulin injections or other medicines. Some examples include: Along with medicines to lower blood sugar, people with diabetes often need medications to lower their blood pressure and statins to reduce the risk of complications. Additional medical care may be needed to treat the effects of diabetes:
WHO aims to stimulate and support the adoption of effective measures for the surveillance, prevention and control of diabetes and its complications, particularly in low- and middle-income countries. To this end, WHO:
In April 2021 WHO launched the Global Diabetes Compact, a global initiative aiming for sustained improvements in diabetes prevention and care, with a particular focus on supporting low- and middle-income countries. In May 2021, the World Health Assembly agreed a Resolution on strengthening prevention and control of diabetes. In May 2022 the World Health Assembly endorsed five global diabetes coverage targets to be achieved by 2030.
To learn more about the Global Diabetes Compact, to access diabetes-related technical publications to get involved in upcoming initiatives, visit the Global Diabetes Compact webpage.
References
1. Global Burden of Disease Collaborative Network. Global Burden of Disease Study 2021. Results. Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation. 2024 .
Related
News
Fact sheets

========================================
diarrhoeal-disease
========================================
Diarrhoeal disease is the third leading cause of death in children under 5 years old and is responsible for killing around 443 832 children every year. Diarrhoea can last several days and can leave the body without the water and salts that are necessary for survival. In the past, for most people, severe dehydration and fluid loss were the main causes of diarrhoea-associated deaths. Now, other causes such as septic bacterial infections are likely to account for an increasing proportion of all diarrhoea-associated deaths. Children who are malnourished or have impaired immunity, as well as people living with HIV, are most at risk of life-threatening diarrhoea.
Diarrhoea is defined as the passage of 3 or more loose or liquid stools per day . Frequent passing of formed stools is not diarrhoea, nor is the passing of loose, pasty stools by breastfed babies. Diarrhoea is usually a symptom of an infection in the intestinal tract, which can be caused by a variety of bacterial, viral and parasitic organisms. Infection is spread through contaminated food or drinking-water, or from person-to-person as a result of poor hygiene. Interventions to prevent diarrhoea, including safe drinking-water, use of improved sanitation and hand washing with soap, can reduce disease risk. Diarrhoea should be treated with oral rehydration solution , a solution of clean water, sugar and salt. In addition, a 10–14 day supplemental treatment course of dispersible zinc tablets shortens diarrhoea duration and improves outcomes.
There are 3 clinical types of diarrhoea:
Diarrhoeal disease is a leading cause of child mortality and morbidity in the world, and mostly results from contaminated food and water sources. Worldwide, 780 million individuals lack access to improved drinking-water and 2.5 billion lack improved sanitation. Diarrhoea due to infection is widespread throughout developing countries.
In low-income countries, children under 3 years old experience on average three episodes of diarrhoea every year. Each episode deprives the child of the nutrition necessary for growth. As a result, diarrhoea is a major cause of malnutrition, and malnourished children are more likely to fall ill from diarrhoea.
The most severe threat posed by diarrhoea is dehydration. During a diarrhoeal episode, water and electrolytes are lost through liquid stools, vomit, sweat, urine and breathing. Dehydration occurs when these losses are not replaced.
The degree of dehydration is rated on a scale of 3.
Infection: Diarrhoea is a symptom of infections caused by a host of bacterial, viral and parasitic organisms, most of which are spread by faeces-contaminated water. Infection is more common when there is a shortage of adequate sanitation and hygiene and safe water for drinking, cooking and cleaning. Among children under 5 years of age, the most common viral pathogens are rotavirus, norovirus, adenovirus and astrovirus. Bacterial pathogens include Escherichia coli, Salmonella spp., Shigella spp., and Campylobacter spp., while parasitic pathogens include Cryptosporidium, Giardia, and Entamoeba spp. Rotavirus and E. coli are the most common pathogens among children across all age groups, while parasitic pathogens, are prevalent in children aged 3–5 years. Bacterial pathogens, including E. coli, Salmonella, and Shigella, were common in the children age 6 to 10-year age group, as were rotavirus, norovirus, and sapovirus. Location-specific etiologic patterns also need to be considered.
Malnutrition: Children who die from diarrhoea often suffer from underlying malnutrition, which makes them more vulnerable to diarrhoea. Each diarrhoeal episode, in turn, makes their malnutrition even worse. Diarrhoea is a leading cause of malnutrition in children under 5 years old.
Source: Water contaminated with human faeces, for example from sewage, septic tanks and latrines, is of particular concern. Animal faeces also contain microorganisms that can cause diarrhoea.
Other causes: Diarrhoeal disease can also spread from person-to-person, aggravated by poor personal hygiene. Food is another major cause of diarrhoea when it is prepared or stored in unhygienic conditions. Unsafe domestic water storage and handling is also an important risk factor. Fish and seafood from polluted water may also contribute to the disease.
Key measures to prevent diarrhoea include: Key measures to treat diarrhoea include the following.
WHO works with Member States and other partners to:
Related
News
Fact sheets
Feature stories
Documents

========================================
dioxins-and-their-effects-on-human-health
========================================
Dioxins are environmental pollutants. They belong to the so-called dirty dozen – a group of dangerous chemicals known as persistent organic pollutants . Dioxins are of concern because of their highly toxic potential. Experiments have shown they affect several organs and systems. Once dioxins enter the body, they last a long time because of their chemical stability and their ability to be absorbed by fat tissue, where they are then stored in the body. Their half-life in the body is estimated to be 7 to 11 years. In the environment, dioxins tend to accumulate in the food chain. The higher an animal is in the food chain, the higher the concentration of dioxins. The chemical name for dioxin is 2,3,7,8- tetrachlorodibenzo para dioxin . The name dioxins is often used for the family of structurally and chemically related polychlorinated dibenzo para dioxins and polychlorinated dibenzofurans . Certain dioxin-like polychlorinated biphenyls with similar toxic properties are also included under the term dioxins. Some 419 types of dioxin-related compounds have been identified but only about 30 of these are considered to have significant toxicity, with TCDD being the most toxic.
Dioxins are mainly by-products of industrial processes but can also result from natural processes, such as volcanic eruptions and forest fires. They are unwanted by-products of many manufacturing processes including smelting, chlorine bleaching of paper pulp and the manufacture of some herbicides and pesticides. Uncontrolled waste incinerators are often the worst culprits of environmental release due to incomplete burning. Technology is available that allows for controlled waste incineration with low dioxin emissions.
Although formation of dioxins is local, environmental distribution is global. The highest levels are found in some soils, sediments and food, especially dairy products, meat, fish and shellfish. Very low levels are found in plants, water and air.
Extensive stores of PCB-based waste industrial oils, many with high levels of PCDFs, exist throughout the world. Long-term storage and improper disposal of this material may result in dioxin release into the environment and the contamination of human and animal food supplies. PCB-based waste is not easily disposed of without contamination of the environment and human populations. Such material needs to be treated as hazardous waste and is best destroyed by high temperature incineration in specialized facilities.
Many countries monitor their food supply for dioxins. This has led to early detection of contamination and has often prevented larger impacts. In many instances dioxin contamination is introduced via contaminated animal feed, e.g. incidences of increased dioxin levels in milk or animal feed were traced back to clay, fat or citrus pulp pellets used in the production of the animal feed. Although all countries can be affected, most contamination cases have been reported in industrialized countries where adequate food contamination monitoring, greater awareness of the hazard and better regulatory controls are available.
Short-term exposure of humans to high levels of dioxins may result in skin lesions, such as chloracne and patchy darkening of the skin, and altered liver function. Long-term exposure is linked to impairment of the immune system, the developing nervous system, the endocrine system and reproductive functions. Chronic exposure of animals to dioxins has resulted in several types of cancer. TCDD was evaluated by the WHO’s International Agency for Research on Cancer in 1997 and 2012. Based on animal and human epidemiology data, TCDD was classified by IARC as a known human carcinogen. However, TCDD does not affect genetic material and there is a level of exposure below which cancer risk would be negligible.
Due to the omnipresence of dioxins, all people have background exposure and a certain level of dioxins in the body, leading to the so-called body burden. Current normal background exposure is not expected to affect human health on average. However, due to the high toxic potential of this class of compounds, efforts are needed to reduce current background exposure.
The developing fetus is most sensitive to dioxin exposure. Newborns, with rapidly developing organ systems, may also be more vulnerable to certain effects. Some people or groups of people may be exposed to higher levels of dioxins because of their diet or their occupation .
Proper incineration of contaminated material is the best available method of preventing and controlling exposure to dioxins. It can also destroy PCB-based waste oils. The incineration process requires temperatures over 850 °C. For the destruction of large amounts of contaminated material, temperatures of 1000 °C or more are required.
Prevention or reduction of human exposure is best done via source-directed measures, i.e. strict control of industrial processes to reduce formation of dioxins as much as possible. This is the responsibility of national governments. The Codex Alimentarius Commission adopted a Code of Practice for Source Directed Measures to Reduce Contamination of Foods with Chemicals in 2001. In 2006 a Code of Practice for the Prevention and Reduction of Dioxin and Dioxin-like PCB Contamination in Food and Feeds was adopted. More than 90% of human exposure to dioxins is through the food supply, mainly meat and dairy products, fish and shellfish. Therefore, protecting the food supply is critical. In addition to source-directed measures to reduce dioxin emissions, secondary contamination of the food supply needs to be avoided throughout the food chain. Good controls and practices during primary production, processing, distribution and sale are all essential in the production of safe food. Contaminated animal feed is often the root cause of food contamination.
Food and feed contamination monitoring systems must be in place to ensure that tolerance levels are not exceeded. It is the responsibility of feed and food producers to assure safe raw materials and processes during production, and it is the role of national governments to monitor the safety of food supply and to take action to protect public health. When contamination is suspected, countries should have contingency plans to identify, detain and dispose of contaminated feed and food. The affected population should be examined for exposure and effects .
Trimming fat from meat and consuming low fat dairy products may decrease the exposure to dioxin compounds. Also, a balanced diet will help to avoid excessive exposure from a single source. This is a long-term strategy to reduce body burdens and is probably most relevant for girls and young women to reduce exposure of the developing fetus and when breastfeeding infants later in life. However, the possibility for consumers to reduce their own exposure is limited. The quantitative chemical analysis of dioxins requires sophisticated methods that are available only in a limited number of laboratories around the world. The analysis costs are very high and vary according to the type of sample.
Increasingly, biological screening methods are being developed, and the use of such methods for food and feed samples is increasingly being validated. Such screening methods allow more analyses at a lower cost, and in case of a positive screening test, confirmation of results must be carried out by more complex chemical analysis.
In 2015, WHO published the first estimates of the global burden of foodborne disease. Exposure to dioxins was shown to contribute significantly to foodborne disease burden globally, specifically on fertility and on thyroid function. WHO has held a series of expert meetings to determine a tolerable intake of dioxins. In 2001, the Joint Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations /WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives performed an updated comprehensive risk assessment of PCDDs, PCDFs, and dioxin-like PCBs. WHO, in collaboration with FAO, through the Codex Alimentarius Commission, established a Code of Practice for the Prevention and Reduction of Dioxin and Dioxin-like PCB Contamination in Foods and Feed. This document gives guidance to national and regional authorities on preventive measures. Related
News
Fact sheets
More
Exposure to dioxins and dioxin-like substances

========================================
diphtheria
========================================
Diphtheria is a contagious disease that is caused by toxin producing bacteria. It can spread from person to person when an infected person coughs or sneezes. Some people may not develop disease manifestations but can still transmit the bacteria to others. Others will develop mild disease, although severe disease, complications and death can also occur. Diphtheria can affect anyone but was most common in unvaccinated children. The diphtheria toxin causes damage to the respiratory tract and can spread throughout the body. Common symptoms include fever, sore throat and swelling of the neck glands.
Being vaccinated is the best way to prevent getting sick with diphtheria or spreading it to other people. The vaccine is safe and helps your body fight off the infection.
Before the introduction of diphtheria vaccine and widespread vaccination in the 1930s, cases occurred throughout the world. Recently, as a result of under vaccination, outbreaks have been occurring with increasing frequency despite the availability of a safe and effective vaccine.
The COVID-19 pandemic impacted delivery of routine immunization services and surveillance activities. These setbacks have left many children susceptible to vaccine preventable diseases such as diphtheria. No WHO region is completely free from diphtheria, and areas with low immunization coverage with the diphtheria toxoid-containing vaccine allow the bacteria to circulate, increasing the likelihood of outbreaks and putting all unvaccinated and under vaccinated individuals at risk.
Immunization and surveillance programs should be strengthened within primary healthcare, and efforts should be made to reach all children with 3 diphtheria toxoid-containing vaccine doses during infancy, childhood and adolescence. Countries should also implement robust surveillance systems to identify and confirm cases and close immunity gaps rapidly.
Symptoms of diphtheria usually begin 2–5 days after exposure to the bacteria. Typical symptoms of the infection include a sore throat, fever, swollen neck glands and weakness. Within 2–3 from infection, the dead tissue in the respiratory tract forms a thick, grey coating that can cover tissues in the nose, tonsils and throat, making it hard to breathe and swallow. Most severe disease and deaths from diphtheria occur as a result of the diphtheria toxin and its effects. Complications can include inflammation of the heart and nerves. For unvaccinated individuals without adequate treatment, diphtheria can be fatal in around 30% of cases, which children younger than 5 years of age at greater risk of dying.
Any non-immune person can become infected. Diphtheria has seen resurgences any time immunization coverage becomes low. Damaged health infrastructure and health services in countries experiencing or recovering from a natural disaster or conflict interrupt routine immunization. Overcrowding in residential camps increases the risk of infection. The risk of complications or death decrease considerably if appropriate treatment is provided early in the course of illness. For this reason, if diphtheria is suspected, testing to confirm the disease should be done promptly and treatment should be started as soon as possible. Cases of diphtheria are usually treated with diphtheria antitoxin as well as antibiotics. Diphtheria specific antitoxin neutralizes circulation toxin in the blood. Detailed instructions for giving antitoxin can be found in the WHO treatment guidelines. Antibiotics stop bacterial replication and thereby toxin production, speed up getting rid of the bacteria and prevents transmission to others. However, many current strains of diphtheria have exhibited resistance to some commonly used antimicrobial drugs. Anyone that has had diphtheria should also receive vaccine after the acute phase of the illness is over. Individuals who have been in contact with cases of diphtheria should be treated with antibiotics prophylactically to prevent illness. Their immunization status of all contacts should also be checked. If they are not fully vaccinated, they should also be offered vaccine.
Diphtheria can be prevented by vaccines that are often given in combination with tetanus and pertussis and other diseases. WHO recommends a total of 6 diphtheria-containing vaccine doses be given starting at 6 weeks of age through adolescence to provide long term protection.
Community-wide vaccination with high coverage as a part of routine immunization services embedded in primary health care is the most effective way to prevent diphtheria. All children should be vaccinated against diphtheria with a full primary series and 3 additional booster doses for long term protection. The vaccine is safe and effective.
The diphtheria vaccine is given most often combined with vaccines for diseases such as tetanus, pertussis, Hemophilus influenzae, hepatitis B and inactivated polio.
Combining vaccines slightly increases the cost but allows for shared delivery and administration costs, and importantly adds the benefit of protection against other childhood illness that can cause tetanus, pertussis, meningitis and polio. In 2023, 84% of children received all 3 doses of the primary series of diphtheria vaccine. However, there are substantial variations in coverage levels between and within countries. Under vaccination in successive cohorts of children can lead to cases and outbreaks of diphtheria. The essential programme on immunization began in 1974. Combination diphtheria vaccines were introduced as part of this programme since its inception and have prevented >90% cases of disease between 1980–2000. WHO continues to work with member states to promote vaccination to sustain vaccine coverage and prevent disease in communities.
In recent years, there have been outbreaks of diphtheria due to inadequate vaccine coverage. To control these outbreaks, WHO has worked with member states in outbreak response and in strengthening routine immunization programmes to improve and sustain immunization coverage to prevent diphtheria infections and deaths. References
Related
News
Fact sheets

========================================
disability-and-health
========================================
Disability is part of being human and is integral to the human experience. It results from the interaction between health conditions such as dementia, blindness or spinal cord injury, and a range of environmental and personal factors. An estimated 1.3 billion people – or 16% of the global population – experience a significant disability today. This number is growing because of an increase in noncommunicable diseases and people living longer. Persons with disabilities are a diverse group, and factors such as sex, age, gender identity, sexual orientation, religion, race, ethnicity and their economic situation affect their experiences in life and their health needs. Persons with disabilities die earlier, have poorer health, and experience more limitations in everyday functioning than others.
Health inequities arise from unfair conditions faced by persons with disabilities.
Structural factors: Persons with disabilities experience ableism, stigma and discrimination in all facets of life, which affects their physical and mental health. Laws and policies may deny them the right to make their own decisions and allow a range of harmful practices in the health sector, such as forced sterilization, involuntary admission and treatment, and even institutionalization.
Social determinants of health: Poverty, exclusion from education and employment, and poor living conditions all add to the risk of poor health and unmet health care needs among persons with disabilities. Gaps in formal social support mechanisms mean that persons with disabilities are reliant on support from family members to engage in health and community activities, which not only disadvantages them but also their caregivers . Risk factors: Persons with disabilities are more likely to have risk factors for non-communicable diseases, such as smoking, poor diet, alcohol consumption and a lack of physical activity. A key reason for this is that they are often left out of public health interventions.
Health system: Persons with disabilities face barriers in all aspects of the health system. For example, a lack of knowledge, negative attitudes and discriminatory practices among healthcare workers; inaccessible health facilities and information; and lack of information or data collection and analysis on disability, all contribute to health inequities faced by this group.
Countries have an obligation under international human rights law, and in some cases domestic laws, to address the health inequities faced by persons with disabilities. There are two important international frameworks which relate to health equity for persons with disabilities.
The Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities requires States Parties to ensure that persons with disabilities have access to the same range, quality and standard of free or affordable health care as other people. The World Health Assembly Resolution WHA74.8 on the highest attainable standard of health for persons with disabilities calls for Member States to ensure that persons with disabilities receive effective health services as part of universal health coverage; equal protection during emergencies; and equal access to cross-sectoral public health interventions.
Disability inclusion is critical to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and global health priorities to achieve health for all.
Universal health coverage will not be achieved if persons with disabilities do not receive quality health services on an equal basis with others. Investing in universal health coverage for persons with disabilities will benefit not only individuals but also communities.
There could be almost an US$ 10 return for every US$ 1 spent on implementing disability inclusive prevention and care for noncommunicable diseases. Persons with disabilities must be considered when preventing and responding to health emergencies because they are more likely to be affected, both directly and indirectly. For example, during the COVID-19 pandemic, persons with disabilities living in institutions have been “cut off from the rest of society” with reports of residents being overmedicated, sedated, or locked up, and examples of self-harm also occurring (1). In the COVID-19 pandemic, there are higher mortality rates among persons with intellectual disabilities (2), who are also less likely to receive intensive care services (3). Promoting healthier populations through clean air and water, road safety, child nutrition and addressing violence against women will only be achieved if public health interventions for the wider population consider the needs, skills and capacities of persons with disabilities.
Women with disabilities being 2–4 times more likely to experience intimate partner violence than those without disabilities (4).
The WHO Global report on health equity for persons with disabilities outlines 40 key actions for countries to take to strengthen their health systems and reduce health inequities for persons with disabilities. There are three things that all governments and health sector partners can do. First, they must consider health equity for persons with disabilities in all health sector actions. Second, they can include persons with disabilities in decision-making processes. Third, they can monitor how persons with disabilities are being reached and benefitting from health sector actions.
WHO works to ensure persons with disabilities have equitable access to effective health services; are included in health emergencies preparedness and responses; and can access cross-sectoral public health interventions to achieve the highest attainable standard of health. Towards this goal, WHO:
References
Related
News
Fact sheets
Events

========================================
dracunculiasis
========================================
Dracunculiasis, also called Guinea-worm disease, is a parasitic disease transmitted through contaminated drinking water, causing a painful blister from which a worm slowly emerges. It results from ingesting the parasite Dracunculus medinensis. Although it rarely causes death, infected individuals are often incapacitated for weeks or months. This disease predominantly affects rural, underserved, and remote populations that rely on open, stagnant water sources for drinking-water.
During the mid-1980s, approximately 3.5 million cases of dracunculiasis occurred in 20 countries worldwide, 17 located in Africa and the remaining 3 in Asia. Subsequent interventions reduced reported cases to fewer than 10 000 in 2007, then further down to 542 in 2012 and 126 in 2014. Since 2015, annual human cases have remained in double digits, declining from 22 in 2015 to 13 in 2024. In that same year, 12 villages in Chad and South Sudan accounted for all known human infections. Five countries – Angola, Chad, Ethiopia, Mali, and South Sudan – remain endemic, while Sudan is currently in the pre-certification stage and Cameroon a certified country is experiencing a cross-border transmission at its extreme-northern border with Chad. Localized transmission of Guinea worm in animals mostly domestic dogs and cats, in the remaining few countries, added a challenge to the eradication programme.
Roughly one year following infection, a blister develops on the lower leg in about 90% of cases, and one or more adult worms emerge alongside a burning sensation. Patients often immerse the affected region in water to relieve pain. This contact enables the worm to expel thousands of larvae into the water, where they are ingested by tiny crustaceans , commonly known as water fleas. People and certain animals, such as dogs or cats swallow these infected water fleas mostly by drinking contaminated water or by consuming raw or undercooked aquatic hosts harbouring the infective larvae. Although the water fleas die in the stomach, the released larvae penetrate the intestinal wall and migrate through the body until a fertilized female, measuring 60–100 cm, settles beneath the skin. Ten to fourteen months later, it emerges at an exit site, typically the lower limb.
Elimination and then eradication of dracunculiasis have been championed by the World Health Assembly via several key resolutions: WHA39.21 , WHA42.29 , WHA44.5 , WHA57.9 , and WHA64.16 . In May 1981, the Interagency Steering Committee for Cooperative Action for the International Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation Decade identified dracunculiasis elimination as a benchmark of success for the Decade. That same year, the WHA adopted resolution WHA34.25, recognizing the opportunity to interrupt transmission of dracunculiasis during the Decade. This led WHO and the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to develop a systematic strategy and technical guidance.
In 1986, The Carter Center joined the global campaign against the disease, in partnership with WHO and UNICEF. Later, the WHA, through resolution WHA64.16 , urged all Member States where dracunculiasis was still endemic to expedite interrupting transmission and strengthen nationwide surveillance measures necessary for its eradication.
There is no vaccine or cure for dracunculiasis, but prevention and surveillance measures have brought the disease to the brink of eradication. Essential approaches include:
More detailed guidelines on eradication strategies can be found through this link. For a country to be declared free of dracunculiasis, it must maintain zero reported human cases and zero animal infections over a period of at least three consecutive years, during which active surveillance is rigorously upheld. Subsequently, an international certification team visits to evaluate the robustness of the surveillance system, examine investigatory records for rumoured cases or infected animals, and verify follow-up measures. The team also checks access to improved drinking-water in prior outbreak areas and assesses potential reintroduction risks. Their final report is sent to the International Commission for the Certification of Dracunculiasis Eradication for review.Since 1995, the ICCDE has convened 16 times and, upon its recommendations, WHO has certified 200 countries, territories, and areas as free of dracunculiasis transmission. The Democratic Republic of the Congo, once endemic in 1950s, received certification in December 2022. WHO published the latest criteria for dracunculiasis certification in 2023.
WHO recommends that any country which has recently interrupted transmission of Guinea-worm disease maintain active surveillance for no fewer than three consecutive years. This requirement ensures no human case or infected animal is overlooked, thereby preventing disease recurrence. Because the incubation period ranges from 10 to 14 months, a single undetected worm can delay eradication progress by at least a year. Past instances of re-emergence in Ethiopia and Chad , after both had reported zero cases for prolonged intervals, highlight why continuous vigilance is critical. If a country reports zero cases for 14 months, it is considered to have interrupted transmission but remains in the pre-certification phase for a minimum of three additional years. Even once certification is achieved, surveillance must continue until global eradication is ultimately declared.
Identifying and containing the final few clusters of cases and infected animals constitutes the most challenging – and costly – phase of eradication efforts, especially in remote or conflict-prone regions. Security issues frequently restrict access, slowing progress and complicating interventions. Infections in humans or animals have also been detected in certified nations sharing borders with remaining endemic areas, underscoring the risk of reintroducing transmission. This situation demands robust post-certification surveillance, including cross-border surveillance, until eradication is globally declared.Infection of Dracunculus medinensis in dogs remains a serious obstacle, notably in Angola, Chad, Ethiopia and Mali. It was first detected in Chad in 2012, where many dogs carrying genetically identical worms to those in humans have been identified in the same region where human cases have been detected. From January to December 2024 , 661 infected animals were reported across Angola , Cameroon , Chad , Ethiopia , Mali , and South Sudan .
Interrupting transmission in animals requires enhanced surveillance, early containment of infected animals, proactive tethering, community education, and rigorous vector control.
WHO, in collaboration with governments and key partners, continues to advocate for eradication, provide technical guidance, oversee eradication efforts, and support surveillance and response in cross-border areas of affected countries and in previously endemic countries. WHO is the sole organization mandated by the WHA to certify countries as free of Guinea-worm disease, following recommendations from the International Commission for the Certification of Dracunculiasis Eradication . The Commission meets as needed to evaluate country applications and determine certification status.
Notes
Related
News
Fact sheets
Feature stories

========================================
drinking-water
========================================
Overview
Safe and readily available water is important for public health, whether it is used for drinking, domestic use, food production or recreational purposes. Improved water supply and sanitation, and better management of water resources, can boost countries’ economic growth and can contribute greatly to poverty reduction.
In 2010, the UN General Assembly explicitly recognized the human right to water and sanitation. Everyone has the right to sufficient, continuous, safe, acceptable, physically accessible and affordable water for personal and domestic use.
Sustainable Development Goal target 6.1 calls for universal and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water. The target is tracked with the indicator of “safely managed drinking water services” – drinking water from an improved water source that is located on premises, available when needed, and free from faecal and priority chemical contamination.
In 2022, 6 billion people used safely managed drinking-water services – that is, they used improved water sources located on premises, available when needed, and free from contamination. The remaining 2.2 billion people without safely managed services in 2022 included:
Contaminated water and poor sanitation are linked to transmission of diseases such as cholera, diarrhoea, dysentery, hepatitis A, typhoid and polio. Absent, inadequate, or inappropriately managed water and sanitation services expose individuals to preventable health risks. This is particularly the case in health care facilities where both patients and staff are placed at additional risk of infection and disease when water, sanitation and hygiene services are lacking. Out of every 100 patients in acute-care hospitals, 7 patients in high-income countries and 15 patients in low- and middle-income countries will acquire at least one health care-associated infection during their hospital stay.
Inadequate management of urban, industrial and agricultural wastewater means the drinking-water of hundreds of millions of people is dangerously contaminated or chemically polluted. Natural presence of chemicals, particularly in groundwater, can also be of health significance, including arsenic and fluoride, while other chemicals, such as lead, may be elevated in drinking-water as a result of leaching from water supply components in contact with drinking-water.
Some 1 million people are estimated to die each year from diarrhoea as a result of unsafe drinking-water, sanitation and hand hygiene. Yet diarrhoea is largely preventable, and the deaths of 395 000 children aged under 5 years could be avoided each year if these risk factors were addressed. Where water is not readily available, people may decide handwashing is not a priority, thereby adding to the likelihood of diarrhoea and other diseases.
Diarrhoea is the most widely known disease linked to contaminated food and water but there are other hazards. In 2021, over 251.4 million people required preventative treatment for schistosomiasis – an acute and chronic disease caused by parasitic worms contracted through exposure to infested water.
When water comes from improved and more accessible sources, people spend less time and effort physically collecting it, meaning they can be productive in other ways. This can also result in greater personal safety and reducing musculoskeletal disorders by reducing the need to make long or risky journeys to collect and carry water. Better water sources also mean less expenditure on health, as people are less likely to fall ill and incur medical costs and are better able to remain economically productive.
With children particularly at risk from water-related diseases, access to improved sources of water can result in better health, and therefore better school attendance, with positive longer-term consequences for their lives.
Historical rates of progress would need to double for the world to achieve universal coverage with basic drinking water services by 2030. To achieve universal safely managed services will require a 6-fold increase. Climate change, increasing water scarcity, population growth, demographic changes and urbanization already pose challenges for water supply systems. Over 2 billion people live in water-stressed countries, which is expected to be exacerbated in some regions as result of climate change and population growth. Re-use of wastewater to recover water, nutrients or energy is becoming an important strategy. Use of wastewater and sludge is widespread globally; however, much is used informally and/or without sufficient treatment and other controls to ensure that human and environmental health is protected. If done appropriately safe use of wastewater and sludge can yield multiple benefits, including increased food production, increased resilience to water and nutrient scarcity and greater circularity in the economy.
Options for water sources used for drinking-water and irrigation will continue to evolve, with an increasing reliance on groundwater and alternative sources, including wastewater. Climate change will lead to greater fluctuations in harvested rainwater. Management of all water resources will need to be improved to ensure provision and quality.
As the international authority on public health and water quality, WHO leads global efforts to prevent water-related disease, advising governments on the development of health-based targets and regulations.
WHO produces a series of water quality guidelines, including on drinking-water, safe use of wastewater, and recreational water quality. The water quality guidelines are based on managing risks, and since 2004 the Guidelines for drinking-water quality promote the Framework for safe drinking-water. The Framework recommends establishment of health-based targets, the development and implementation of water safety plans by water suppliers to most effectively identify and manage risks from catchment to consumer, and independent surveillance to ensure that water safety plans are effective and health-based targets are being met.The drinking-water guidelines are supported by background publications that provide the technical basis for the Guidelines recommendations. WHO also supports countries to implement the drinking-water quality guidelines through the development of practical guidance materials and provision of direct country support. This includes the development of locally relevant drinking-water quality regulations aligned to the principles in the Guidelines, the development, implementation and auditing of water safety plans and strengthening of surveillance practices.
Since 2014, WHO has been testing household water treatment products against WHO health-based performance criteria through the WHO International Scheme to Evaluate Household Water Treatment Technologies. The aim of the scheme is to ensure that products protect users from the pathogens that cause diarrhoeal disease and to strengthen policy, regulatory and monitoring mechanisms at the national level to support appropriate targeting and consistent and correct use of such products.
WHO works closely with UNICEF in a number of areas concerning water and health, including on water, sanitation, and hygiene in health care facilities. In 2015 the two agencies jointly developed WASH FIT , an adaptation of the water safety plan approach. WASH FIT aims to guide small, primary health care facilities in low- and middle-income settings through a continuous cycle of improvement through assessments, prioritization of risk, and definition of specific, targeted actions. A 2023 report describes practical steps that countries can take to improve water, sanitation and hygiene in health care facilities.
References
Related
News
Fact sheets

========================================
drowning
========================================
Drowning is the process of experiencing respiratory impairment from submersion/immersion in liquid. Outcomes are classified as death, morbidity and no morbidity.
The global burden of drowning impacts all economies and regions, however:
Since 2000 the global drowning death rate has fallen by 38%, from 6.1 to 3.8 per 100 000 population. Despite this progress, drowning deaths remain a preventable public health crisis, and the declines seen in the past two decades fall short of what is needed to meet the many Sustainable Development Goals to which drowning prevention contributes.
Young children are at a particularly high risk of drowning due to an underdeveloped ability to assess risk, and a lack of swimming and water safety skills. The risk of drowning increases when children interact with water outside of active adult supervision. Children and young adults aged 0–29 years account for over half of all drowning deaths. The highest drowning rates per population are among children aged 0–4 years. At the regional level, drowning rates among children 0-4 years are highest in the WHO Eastern Mediterranean Region at 16.8 deaths per 100 :000 population. In the WHO Western Pacific Region children aged 5–14 years die more frequently from drowning than any other cause.
The drowning death rate among males is more than twice as high as females. Males are also more likely to be hospitalized than females for non-fatal drowning. Studies suggest that the higher drowning rates among males are due to increased exposure to water and riskier behaviour such as swimming alone, drinking alcohol before swimming alone and boating.
Drowning disproportionately affects poor and marginalized people. Whether it be through the use of ponds, rivers or lakes for bathing and washing clothing, or using open wells for collecting water, the pattern of daily exposure in low- and middle-income countries brings a higher risk of drowning.
Individuals with occupations such as commercial or subsistence fishing face a substantially higher risk of drowning. The United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization estimates that more than 32 000 fishers die while working every year. Climate change has aggravated the hazardous conditions under which most fishers work, as extreme weather and natural disasters become more prevalent and destructive. Climate change is causing more extreme weather events, such as floods and heatwaves. Drowning accounts for 75% of deaths in flood disasters. Drowning risks due to floods are particularly high in low- and middle-income countries where early warning systems and flood mitigation infrastructure are underdeveloped. Heatwaves increase the risk of drowning. As temperatures rise, more people seek water for heat relief and typically spend longer periods of time in and on the water. Travelling on water, particularly in dangerous weather conditions or without appropriate safety equipment, can increase drowning risk. In many low- and middle-income countries, water transport is significantly less regulated than in high-income countries. Daily commuting often takes place on overcrowded and unsafe vessels, operated by staff who have not been trained to recognize hazardous conditions or perform high-seas navigation.
Increasing numbers of people are being displaced or migrating due to conflict, political and or economic instability and climate change. Many people resort to irregular channels for migration that are extremely hazardous, including across large expanses of water in treacherous conditions, often using overcrowded, unsafe vessels that lack safety equipment or are operated by untrained personnel. There are many actions to prevent drowning. Covering wells, using doorway barriers and playpens, fencing swimming pools and otherwise controlling access to water hazards greatly reduces water hazard exposure and risk.
Community-based, supervised childcare for pre-school children can reduce drowning risk and has other proven health benefits. Teaching school-age children basic swimming, water safety and safe rescue skills is another approach. But these efforts must be undertaken with an emphasis on safety, and an overall risk management that includes a safety-tested curricula, a safe training area, screening and student selection, and student-instructor ratios established for safety.
A WHO investment case modelling investment in drowning prevention between now and 2050 shows scaling up just two interventions to be cost-saving. Through investing in day-care programmes for pre-school children and teaching children basic swim skills, 774 000 fewer children would drown between now and 2050. Furthermore, another 178 000 children would avoid severe, life-limiting injuries due to non-fatal drowning over the same period. Scaling these two interventions is projected to result in savings of over US$ 400 billion – a return of 9 times the value of the cost of scaling up the interventions. Effective policies and legislation are also important for drowning prevention. Setting and enforcing safe boating, shipping and ferry regulations are vital to improving safety on the water and preventing drowning. Building resilience to flooding and managing flood risks through better disaster preparedness planning, land use planning, and early warning systems can prevent drowning during flood disasters.
Developing a national water safety strategy can provide strategic direction and a framework to guide multisectoral action and allow for monitoring and evaluation of efforts.
The Global status report on drowning prevention shows that drowning deaths rates have dropped significantly in recent years, yet drowning remains an urgent and often overlooked global health issue. Governments must reinforce proven prevention measures and prioritize drowning prevention and its integration with other public health agendas. In April 2021, the UN General Assembly adopted the first-ever Resolution on drowning prevention, which highlighted links to sustainable development, social equity, urban health, climate change, disaster risk reduction, and child health and well-being. The Resolution called on WHO to coordinate multisectoral drowning prevention efforts within the UN system and announced 25 July as World Drowning Prevention Day. In May 2023, the Seventy-sixth World Health Assembly adopted a Resolution to accelerate further action through 2029. Through the Resolution, WHO committed to establishing a Global Alliance for Drowning Prevention with organizations of the UN system, international development partners and NGOs. Further, WHO will prepare a global status report on drowning prevention for release in 2024.
At country level, WHO is working with Ministries of Health in several low- and middle-income countries, guiding the development of national drowning prevention strategies and supporting delivery of evidence-based drowning prevention interventions. In addition, WHO has also funded research in low-income countries exploring priority questions related to drowning prevention. At regional level, WHO organizes training programmes and convenes workshops to draw together representatives of governments, NGOs and UN agencies working on drowning prevention.
Related

========================================
e-coli
========================================
Escherichia coli is a bacterium that is commonly found in the gut of humans and warm-blooded animals. Most strains of E. coli are harmless. Some strains however, such as Shiga toxin-producing E. coli , can cause severe foodborne disease. It is transmitted to humans primarily through consumption of contaminated foods, such as raw or undercooked ground meat products, raw milk, and contaminated raw vegetables and sprouts. STEC produces toxins, known as Shiga-toxins because of their similarity to the toxins produced by Shigella dysenteriae. STEC can grow in temperatures ranging from 7 °C to 50 °C, with an optimum temperature of 37 °C. Some STEC can grow in acidic foods, down to a pH of 4.4, and in foods with a minimum water activity (aW) of 0.95. STEC is destroyed by thorough cooking of foods until all parts reach a temperature of 70 °C or higher. E. coli O157:H7 is the most important STEC serotype in relation to public health; however, other serotypes have frequently been involved in sporadic cases and outbreaks.
Symptoms of the diseases caused by STEC include abdominal cramps and diarrhoea that may in some cases progress to bloody diarrhoea . Fever and vomiting may also occur. The incubation period can range from 3 to 8 days, with a median of 3 to 4 days. Most patients recover within 10 days, but in a small proportion of patients , the infection may lead to a life-threatening disease, such as haemolytic uraemic syndrome . HUS is characterized by acute renal failure, haemolytic anaemia and thrombocytopenia .
It is estimated that up to 10% of patients with STEC infection may develop HUS, with a case-fatality rate ranging from 3 to 5%. Overall, HUS is the most common cause of acute renal failure in young children. It can cause neurological complications in 25% of HUS patients and chronic renal sequelae, usually mild, in around 50% of survivors.
Persons who experience bloody diarrhoea or severe abdominal cramps should seek medical care. Antibiotics are not part of the treatment of patients with STEC disease and may possibly increase the risk of subsequent HUS.
Most available information on STEC relates to serotype O157:H7, since it is easily differentiated biochemically from other E. coli strains. The reservoir of this pathogen appears to be mainly cattle. In addition, other ruminants such as sheep, goats, deer are considered significant reservoirs, while other mammals and birds have been found infected. E. coli O157:H7 is transmitted to humans primarily through consumption of contaminated foods, such as raw or undercooked ground meat products and raw milk. Faecal contamination of water and other foods, as well as cross-contamination during food preparation , will also lead to infection. Examples of foods implicated in outbreaks of E. coli O157:H7 include undercooked hamburgers, dried cured salami, unpasteurized fresh-pressed apple cider, yogurt, and cheese made from raw milk. An increasing number of outbreaks are associated with the consumption of fruits and vegetables whereby contamination may be due to contact with faeces from domestic or wild animals at some stage during cultivation or handling. STEC has also been isolated from bodies of water , wells and water troughs, and has been found to survive for months in manure and water-trough sediments. Waterborne transmission has been reported, both from contaminated drinking-water and from recreational waters.
Person-to-person contact is an important mode of transmission through the oral-faecal route. An asymptomatic carrier state has been reported, where individuals show no clinical signs of disease but are capable of infecting others. The duration of excretion of STEC is about 1 week or less in adults but can be longer in children. Visiting farms and other venues where the general public might come into direct contact with farm animals has also been identified as an important risk factor for STEC infection.
The prevention of infection requires control measures at all stages of the food chain, from agricultural production on the farm to processing, manufacturing and preparation of foods in both commercial establishments and household kitchens.
The number of cases of disease might be reduced by various mitigation strategies for ground beef (for example, screening the animals pre-slaughter to reduce the introduction of large numbers of pathogens in the slaughtering environment). Good hygienic slaughtering practices reduce contamination of carcasses by faeces but do not guarantee the absence of STEC from products.
Education in hygienic handling of foods for workers at farms, abattoirs and those involved in the food production is essential to keep microbiological contamination to a minimum. The only effective method of eliminating STEC from foods is to introduce a bactericidal treatment, such as heating or irradiation. Preventive measures for E. coli O157:H7 infection are similar to those recommended for other foodborne diseases. Basic good food hygiene practices, as described in the WHO “Five keys to safer food”, can prevent the transmission of pathogens responsible for many foodborne diseases, and also protect against foodborne diseases caused by STEC. The five keys to safer food are:
Such recommendations should in all cases be implemented, especially "cook thoroughly" so that the centre of the food reaches at least 70 °C. Make sure to wash fruits and vegetables carefully, especially if they are eaten raw. If possible, vegetables and fruits should be peeled. Vulnerable populations should avoid the consumption of raw or undercooked meat products, raw milk, and products made from raw milk.
Regular handwashing, particularly before food preparation or consumption and after toilet contact, is highly recommended, especially for people who take care of small children, the elderly or immunocompromised individuals, as the bacterium can be passed from person to person, as well as through food, water and direct contact with animals.
A number of STEC infections have been caused by contact with recreational water. Therefore, it is also important to protect such water areas, as well as drinking-water sources, from animal waste (4).
WHO’s "Five keys to growing safer fruits and vegetables" provides rural workers who grow fresh fruits and vegetables for themselves, their families and for sale in local markets, with key practices to prevent microbial contamination of fresh produces during planting, growing, harvesting and storing. The five keys to growing safer fruits and vegetables are:
WHO provides scientific assessments to control STEC in food. These assessments serve as the basis for international food standards, guidelines, and recommendations developed by the Codex Alimentarius Commission.
WHO promotes the strengthening of food safety systems by promoting good manufacturing practices and educating retailers and consumers about appropriate food handling and avoiding contamination.
During E. coli outbreaks, such as those in Europe in 2011, WHO supports the coordination of information sharing and collaboration through International Health Regulations and the International Food Safety Authorities Network worldwide. WHO works closely with national health authorities and international partners, providing technical assistance and the latest information on outbreaks.
Related
Fact sheets
More
RelatedMore about food safetyResponding to food safety emergencies International Health RegulationsEstimating the burden of foodborne diseases

========================================
ebola-disease
========================================
Ebola disease is a rare but severe illness in humans (1). It is often fatal. Ebola disease is caused by viruses that belong to the Orthoebolavirus genus of the filoviridae family (2). Six species of Orthoebolaviruses have been identified to date, with three known to cause large outbreaks:
Ebola disease first occurred in 1976 in two simultaneous outbreaks: one outbreak was of Sudan virus disease in Nzara in what is now South Sudan, and the other outbreak was of Ebola virus disease in Yambuku, in what is now the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The latter occurred in a village near the Ebola River, from which the disease takes its name.
While there are licensed vaccines and therapeutics for Ebola virus disease, there is no approved vaccine or treatment for other Ebola diseases, such as SVD or BVD. Candidate products are in development. Early intensive supportive care including rehydration and treatment of specific symptoms, can improve survival. Seeking early care can be lifesaving. It is thought that fruit bats of the Pteropodidae family are natural hosts of the Orthoebolavirus. The virus can get into the human population when people have close contact with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected animals such as fruit bats, chimpanzees, gorillas, monkeys, forest antelope or porcupines found ill or dead or in the rainforest.
People can get infected with the virus from another person by direct contact with:
People cannot transmit the disease before they have symptoms, and they remain infectious as long as their blood contains the virus.
Health and care workers have frequently been infected while treating patients with Ebola disease. This occurs through close contact with patients when infection control precautions are not strictly practiced.
Burial ceremonies that involve direct contact with the body of a person who has died can also contribute to the transmission of Ebola disease.
The incubation period or interval from infection to onset of symptoms varies from 2 to 21 days.
The symptoms of Ebola disease can be sudden and include fever, fatigue, malaise, muscle pain, headache and sore throat. These are followed by vomiting, diarrhoea, abdominal pain rash, and symptoms of impaired kidney and liver functions. It is important for health and care workers to be on the lookout for these symptoms. Despite a perception that bleeding is a common symptom, this is less frequent and can occur later in the disease. Some patients may develop internal and external bleeding, including blood in vomit and faeces, bleeding from the nose, gums and vagina. Bleeding at the sites where needles have punctured the skin can also occur. The impact on the central nervous system can result in confusion, irritability and aggression.
It can be difficult to clinically distinguish Ebola disease from other infectious diseases such as malaria, typhoid fever, shigellosis, meningitis and other viral haemorrhagic fevers because symptoms at early stage of the disease are similar. Confirmation that the person has an Orthoebolavirus infection is made using the following diagnostic methods:
Samples collected from patients are an extreme biohazard risk; laboratory testing on non-inactivated samples should be conducted under maximum biological containment conditions. All non-inactivated biological specimens should be packaged using the triple packaging system when transported nationally and internationally See Diagnostic testing for Ebola and Marburg diseases.
Over the years, WHO and partners have developed guidance and training that outline how to provide the best possible care for patients and increase their chance of survival, whether or not specific treatments are being used. Called optimized supportive care, this covers the relevant tests to administer, how to manage pain, nutrition and co-infections , and other approaches that put the patient on the best path to recovery.
For Ebola virus disease, WHO made strong recommendations for treatment with mAb114 or REGN-EB3 that are both monoclonal antibodies. For other Ebola diseases, such as SVD or BVD, there are no approved therapeutics, but candidate products are under development and a CORE protocol for clinical trials is available. For Ebola virus disease: For other Ebola diseases, such as SVD:
Community engagement is key to successfully controlling any outbreak. Outbreak control relies on using a range of interventions, such as clinical care, surveillance and contact tracing, laboratory services, infection prevention and control in health facilities, safe and dignified burials, vaccination and social mobilization. Raising awareness of risk factors and protective measures that individuals can take is an effective way to reduce human transmission. Risk reduction messaging should focus on several factors:
Health-care workers should always take standard precautions when caring for patients, regardless of their presumed diagnosis. These include basic hand hygiene, respiratory hygiene, use of personal protective equipment , safe injection practices and safe and dignified burial practices.
Health-care workers caring for patients with suspected or confirmed Ebola disease should apply extra infection control measures to prevent contact with the patients’ blood and body fluids and contaminated surfaces or materials such as clothing and bedding. Infection prevention and control guideline for Ebola and Marburg diseases. Laboratory workers are also at risk. Samples taken from humans and animals for investigation of Orthoebolavirus infection should be handled by trained staff and processed in suitably equipped laboratories.
All survivors, their partners and families should be shown respect, dignity and compassion. WHO does not recommend isolation of recovered patients whose blood has tested negative for Orthoebolavirus. Survivors might suffer from both clinical and psychological sequelae. WHO encourages affected countries to consider the establishment of care programme to alleviate sequelae, support to community reintegration, counselling and biological testing. Orthoebolaviruses are known to persist in immune-privileged sites in some people who have recovered. These sites include the testicles, the inside of the eye and the brain. Relapse-symptomatic illness in the absence of re-infection in someone who has recovered from Ebola disease is rare but has been documented. Reasons for this phenomenon are not yet fully understood.
Ebola virus transmission via infected semen has been documented up to fifteen months after clinical recovery. To mitigate the risk of this transmission, a semen testing programme should be implemented to: In the absence of a semen testing programme, male survivors should follow safer sex practices for 12 months. Orthoebolavirus may persist in the placenta, amniotic fluid and fetus of women infected while pregnant, and in the breast milk of breastfeeding women who are infected with the virus. Survivor care programmes should encompass care for pregnant and breastfeeding women after their recovery. WHO works with countries to prevent Ebola outbreaks by maintaining surveillance and supporting at-risk countries to develop preparedness plans. The following document provides overall guidance for control of Ebola and Marburg virus outbreaks: Ebola and Marburg virus disease epidemics: preparedness, alert, control, and evaluation
When an outbreak is detected, WHO responds by supporting outbreak response, disease detection, community engagement, contact tracing, vaccination, vaccine and treatment trials, case management, laboratory services, infection control, logistics, and training and assistance with safe and dignified burial practices.
References
Related
News
Feature stories
More
FAQs on Ebola virus diseaseFAQs on Ebola vaccinesEbola virus disease outbreak, Guinea: Multi-country strategic readiness and response planHealth Care Readiness: Ebola clinical managementClinical care for survivors of Ebola virus diseaseTherapeutics for Ebola virus diseasePublications on Ebola virus disease Ebola outbreak 2022 - Équateur Province, DRC

========================================
echinococcosis
========================================
Human echinococcosis is a zoonotic disease that is caused by parasites, namely tapeworms of the genus Echinococcus. Echinococcosis occurs in 4 forms:
cystic echinococcosis, also known as hydatid disease or hydatidosis, caused by infection with a species complex centred on Echinococcus granulosus;
alveolar echinococcosis, caused by infection with E. multilocularis;
two forms of neotropical echinococcosis: polycystic caused by infection with E. vogeli; and
unicystic caused by E. oligarthrus.
The two most important forms, which are of medical and public health relevance in humans, are cystic echinococcosis (CE) and alveolar echinococcosis (AE).
A number of herbivorous and omnivorous animals act as intermediate hosts of Echinococcus. They become infected by ingesting the parasite eggs in contaminated food and water, and the parasite then develops into larval stages in the viscera.
Carnivores act as definitive hosts for the parasite, and harbour the mature tapeworm in their intestine. The definitive hosts are infected through the consumption of viscera of intermediate hosts that contain the parasite larvae.
Humans act as so-called accidental intermediate hosts in the sense that they acquire infection in the same way as other intermediate hosts, but are not involved in transmitting the infection to the definitive host.
Several distinct genotypes of E. granulosus are recognised, some having distinct intermediate host preferences. Some genotypes are considered species distinct from E. granulosus. Not all genotypes cause infections in humans. The genotype causing the great majority of cystic echinococcosis infections in humans is principally maintained in a dog–sheep–dog cycle, yet several other domestic animals may also be involved, including goats, swine, cattle, camels and yaks.
Alveolar echinococcosis usually occurs in a wildlife cycle between foxes or other carnivores with small mammals acting as intermediate hosts. Domesticated dogs and cats can also act as definitive hosts.
Human infection with E. granulosus leads to the development of one or more hydatid cysts located most often in the liver and lungs, and less frequently in the bones, kidneys, spleen, muscles and central nervous system.
The asymptomatic incubation period of the disease can last many years until hydatid cysts grow to an extent that triggers clinical signs, however approximately half of all patients that receive medical treatment for infection do so within a few years of their initial infection with the parasite.
Abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting are commonly seen when hydatids occur in the liver. If the lung is affected, clinical signs include chronic cough, chest pain and shortness of breath. Other signs depend on the location of the hydatid cysts and the pressure exerted on the surrounding tissues. Non-specific signs include anorexia, weight loss and weakness.
Alveolar echinococcosis is characterized by an asymptomatic incubation period of 5–15 years and the slow development of a primary tumour-like lesion which is usually located in the liver. Clinical signs include weight loss, abdominal pain, general malaise and signs of hepatic failure.
Larval metastases may spread either to organs adjacent to the liver or distant locations following dissemination of the parasite via the blood and lymphatic system. If left untreated, alveolar echinococcosis is progressive and fatal.
Cystic echinococcosis is globally distributed and found in every continent except Antarctica. Alveolar echinococcosis is confined to the northern hemisphere, in particular to regions of China, the Russian Federation and countries in continental Europe and North America.
In endemic regions, human incidence rates for cystic echinococcosis can reach more than 50 per 100 000 person-years, and prevalence levels as high as 5%–10% may occur in parts of Argentina, Peru, East Africa, Central Asia and China. In livestock, the prevalence of cystic echinococcosis found in slaughterhouses in hyperendemic areas of South America varies from 20%–95% of slaughtered animals.
The highest prevalence is found in rural areas where older animals are slaughtered. Depending on the infected species involved, livestock production losses attributable to cystic echinococcosis result from liver condemnation and may also involve reduction in carcass weight, decrease in hide value, decrease of milk production, and reduced fertility.
Ultrasonography imaging is the technique of choice for the diagnosis of both cystic echinococcosis and alveolar echinococcosis in humans. This technique is usually complemented or validated by computed tomography (CT) and/or magnetic resonance imaging scans.
Cysts can be incidentally discovered by radiography. Specific antibodies are detected by different serological tests and can support the diagnosis.Early detection of E. granulosus and E. multilocularis infections, especially in low-resource settings, is still needed to aid in the selection of clinical treatment options.
Both cystic echinococcosis and alveolar echinococcosis are often expensive and complicated to treat, sometimes requiring extensive surgery and/or prolonged drug therapy. There are 4 options for the treatment of cystic echinococcosis:
The choice must primarily be based on the ultrasound images of the cyst, following a stage-specific approach, and also on the medical infrastructure and human resources available.
For alveolar echinococcosis, early diagnosis and radical surgery followed by anti-infective prophylaxis with albendazole remain the key elements. If the lesion is confined, radical surgery can be curative. Unfortunately in many patients the disease is diagnosed at an advanced stage. As a result, if palliative surgery is carried out without complete and effective anti-infective treatment, frequent relapses will occur.
Both cystic echinococcosis and alveolar echinococcosis represent a substantial disease burden. Worldwide, there may be in excess of 1 million people living with these diseases at any one time. Many of these people will be experiencing severe clinical syndromes which are life-threatening if left untreated. Even with treatment, people often face reduced quality of life.
For cystic echinococcosis, there is an average of 2.2% post-operative death rate for surgical patients and about 6.5% of cases relapse after an intervention, thereby requiring prolonged recovery time.
The 2015 WHO Foodborne Disease Burden Epidemiology Reference Group estimated echinococcosis to be the cause of 19 300 deaths and around 871 000 disability-adjusted life-years (1) globally each year.
Annual costs associated with cystic echinococcosis are estimated to be US$ 3 billion for treating cases and losses to the livestock industry.
Robust surveillance data is fundamental in order to show burden of disease and to evaluate progress and success of control programmes. However, as for other neglected diseases which are focused in underserved populations and remote areas, data is especially scarce and will need more attention if control programmes are to be implemented and measured.
Surveillance for cystic echinococcosis in animals is difficult because the infection is asymptomatic in livestock and dogs. Surveillance is also not recognized or prioritized by communities or local veterinary services.
Cystic echinococcosis is a preventable disease as it involves domestic animal species as definitive and intermediate hosts. Periodic deworming of dogs with praziquantel , improved hygiene in the slaughtering of livestock , and public education campaigns have been found to lower and, in high-income countries, prevent transmission and alleviate the burden of human disease.
Vaccination of sheep with an E. granulosus recombinant antigen offers encouraging prospects for prevention and control. The vaccine is currently being produced commercially and is registered in China and Argentina. Trials in Argentina demonstrated the added value of vaccinating sheep, and in China the vaccine is being used extensively.
A programme combining vaccination of lambs, deworming of dogs and culling of older sheep could lead to elimination of cystic echinococcosis disease in humans in less than 10 years.
Prevention and control of alveolar echinococcosis is more complex as the cycle involves wild animal species as both definitive and intermediate hosts. Regular deworming of domestic carnivores that have access to wild rodents should help to reduce the risk of infection in humans.
Deworming of wild and stray definitive hosts with anthelminthic baits resulted in significant reductions in alveolar echinococcosis prevalence in European and Japanese studies. Culling of foxes and unowned free-roaming dogs appears to be highly inefficient. The sustainability and cost–benefit effectiveness of such campaigns are controversial.
Informal Working Groups on Echinococcosis were founded in 1985 under the auspices of the WHO. For 10 years, under the leadership of Professor J. Eckert , the groups organised meetings of specialists and promoted international scientific exchange and co-operation in the field of echinococcosis research. In 1995, the WHO modified the structure of the groups and transformed them into a single group, the WHO Informal Working Group on Echinococcosis . The mission of the WHO-IWGE is to strengthen prevention and control of echinococcosis through effective collaboration with strategic partners and relevant sectors. The current Chair of the WHO-IWGE is Professor Thomas Junghanss , and Co-Chair is Professor Okan Akhan . The WHO-IWGE developed in 1995 a standardized classification of cystic echinococcosis (CE) that could be applied in all settings. In 2009, the consensus for diagnosis and treatment of CE and alveolar echinococcosis (AE) reached by the WHO-IWGE was published , providing updated guidelines for diagnosis and treatment. The WHO-IWGE is in the process of reviewing the diagnosis and associated clinical management of echinococcosis and elaborating technical manuals with practical applicability. Several workings groups have been created to cover the different aspects of the diseases and are working on creating those documents. The group is also working to promote the collection and mapping of epidemiological data. WHO has been asked by the endemic countries to provide support on early diagnosis and clinical management of cystic echinococcosis. WHO supports capacity building through training courses targeting medical and paramedical personnel, focused on the clinical management of cystic echinococcosis in rural areas of affected countries. This is an integral component to support universal health coverage.
Morocco undertook a project aimed at decentralizing diagnostic and therapeutic techniques and promoting the PAIR strategy in rural and hyperendemic areas. Mongolia has recognized the importance of echinococcosis as a public-health problem and, at the request of the Ministry of Health, WHO in 2013 conducted an initial situation analysis. The analysis focused on implementing early diagnosis and building a basic surveillance system covering humans and animals to understand the actual burden of the disease. A cross-sectional study conducted in Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey in 2014-2015, found that the true burden of CE is poorly understood and that many cases remain asymptomatic, with no appropriate medical diagnosis and treatment. The study assessed the prevalence of the disease among rural populations in the three countries. In the Americas, a cystic echinococcosis control manual was produced by the Pan American Health Organization / WHO Regional Office for the Americas and Panaftosa in 2017. It has been published in Spanish.
The transmission cycle of cystic echinococcosis (CE) involves dogs, and intermediate hosts, commonly sheep. In order to break the transmission cycle, control measures need to consider those animals. Control measures in dogs and sheep, as part of a One-Health approach include the deworming of dogs with praziquantel at least 4 times per year and the vaccination of lambs with EG95 vaccine.
Under the umbrella of One Health, WHO and its partner, the World Organization for Animal Health are supporting the development of echinococcosis control programs including animal interventions. Joint meetings are being held regularly and technical support is provided to promote control, for example in the Central Asia and South Caucasus countries.
WHO assists countries to develop and implement pilot projects leading to the validation of effective cystic echinococcosis control strategies. Working with the veterinary and food safety authorities as well as with other sectors is essential to attain the long-term outcomes of reducing the burden of disease and safeguarding the food value chain. WHO is supporting individual countries to develop their CE control program such as in Mongolia. In 2018, a multidisciplinary stakeholder meeting was convened in Ulaanbaatar to start developing the National Action Plan for control of echinococcosis. No significant investment for echinococcosis has been made, and therefore programmatic steps have been progressing slowly but WHO continues to bring the stakeholders together and further actions have been agreed in 2019. WHO has also facilitated the validation of diagnostic tests used for echinococcosis in dogs that is important for surveillance, and create a baseline in Bayankhongor province of Mongolia. China is integrating echinococcosis prevention, control and treatment in their economic and development plans to raise attention to the vast problem in the country, especially the Tibetan plateau, as well as in the Central Asian Republics.
WHO is promoting One-Health approaches, such as the one developed by Dr Larrieu in the Argentinian Patagonia which involves community health workers, dog deworming and sheep vaccination. Surveillance data is key to understand the disease epidemiological situation and taking action in the risk areas, and for setting up priorities. Data is also necessary to monitor the progress of interventions and evaluate the outcomes of control actions. Indicators are specific variables that assist with the data analysis and provide tools for health authorities and people involved in disease control. WHO has defined a new set of indicators at country and global level for CE and is developing reporting systems to guide and assist the countries on data collection and reporting. At global level, the indicators are 1- Number of endemic countries for CE, and 2- Number of countries with intensified control in hyper endemic areas. A hyperendemic area has been defined as an area with an annual incidence of 5 human cases/100,000 people.
At country level there are epidemiological indicators and control progress indicators. The epidemiological indicators include a combination of passive and active surveillance. The control indicators include impact and outcome indicators. (1) One DALY can be thought of as one lost year of “healthy” life. The sum of these DALYs across the population, or the burden of disease, can be thought of as a measurement of the gap between current health status and an ideal health situation where the entire population lives to an advanced age free of disease and disability.
Related
News
Feature stories

========================================
el-nino-southern-oscillation-(enso)
========================================
El Niño Southern Oscillation is a naturally occurring large-scale climatic phenomenon involving fluctuating ocean temperatures in the central and eastern equatorial Pacific, coupled with changes in the overlying atmosphere. El Niño and La Niña are the oceanic components, while the Southern Oscillation is the atmospheric counterpart, thus giving rise to the term El Niño Southern Oscillation . ENSO occurs in irregular cycles of 2–7 years and presents 3 phases: El Niño, La Niña and a neutral phase. An El Niño event is characterized by a period of sea-surface warming and consequent suppression of the nutrient-rich cold water up-welling off the coast of Peru and Ecuador, typically lasting between 12 and 18 months. In contrast, a La Niña event is characterized by a period of colder than average sea surface temperatures in the central and eastern Pacific Ocean and an intensification of the prevailing east to west surface winds. The effects of each El Niño/La Niña event vary depending on the intensity, duration, time of year when it develops, and the interaction with other modes of climate variability. Not all regions of the world are affected, and even within a region, impacts can be different. Along with increased global temperatures, common regional influences of El Niño include:
El Niño and rainfall – map
La Niña impacts tend to be opposite those of El Niño, with cooler global temperatures and: La Niña and rainfall - map
Local incidence of vector-borne diseases, wildfire smoke exposure, heat stress, drought-related health and nutritional impacts have all been observed to be influenced by ENSO events.
Observed associations between ENSO and health impacts are not linear or unequivocal but depend on the ENSO intensity, time of the year and other factors. Impacts tend to be more intense in less developed countries where populations have limited coping capacity and are often more vulnerable to the impacts of extreme weather and climate. Their livelihoods are often highly dependent on natural resources and rain-fed agricultural practices; housing typically lacks protection against extreme weather events; access to health care and safe drinking-water and adequate sanitation facilities may be limited; and infectious diseases determined by environmental conditions are often pre-existing.
Vectors, such as mosquitoes, that are responsible for the transmission of malaria, dengue and Rift Valley fever are sensitive to changes in temperature, rainfall and humidity, which determine the suitability of ecosystems for vector reproduction, development and activity. The effects of ENSO on malaria are most pronounced in epidemic-prone areas where climate conditions are generally not suitable for year-round vector reproduction. Small changes in climate conditions in these areas have the potential to change normally unsuitable habitats into viable habitats for mosquitoes that transmit malaria, or to temporarily extend the period of malaria susceptibility. The effect of ENSO on malaria is mediated by its impact on rainfall and temperature patterns. In dry areas, intense rainfall can create water puddles; in wet areas, drought can result in reservoirs of stagnant water, both of which are conducive to generation of new mosquito breeding sites. Decreased immunity acquired over time by inhabitants of these new malaria-prone areas can further increase the risk of outbreaks. Evidence of the association between ENSO and malaria has been found in southern Africa, South Asia and South America.
ENSO-related drought conditions can increase the risk of wildfires resulting in local and trans-boundary smoke pollution. The inhalation of fire smoke is a major public health problem, causing respiratory diseases and other harmful effects.
The El Niño-related drought of 1997 contributed to the exacerbation of forest fires in Brazil, Indonesia and Malaysia. In 2015, air quality in 6 South-East Asian countries was impacted by wildfires exacerbated by El Niño-related drought, including Indonesia where a state of emergency was declared due to hazardous air quality.
Any transition from a La Niña to an El Niño phase will likely produce a rise in global average surface temperature, with warming tendencies affecting the development of extreme heat in the Southern Hemisphere. The joint influence of both El Niño warming and rising global temperatures caused by climate change amplifies the potential for extreme heat in many regions, creating deadly conditions for millions of people.
Learn more about heat and climate change
Food production is extremely sensitive to climate conditions. ENSO-related droughts and heavy rainfalls can therefore jeopardize food security. Some of the worst food crisis events have been associated with ENSO.
ENSO events can be predicted with some reliability several months in advance, allowing the climate community to prepare seasonal forecasts with enhanced precision. The increased predictability of climate events on seasonal to inter-annual timescales can help planners and health professionals anticipate, prepare for and respond to ENSO-related health risks. For example:
WHO protects human health from risks related to climate variability through its programmes on environmental and social determinants of health, emergency preparedness and response, infectious disease prevention and control, improving health research and evidence, and health system strengthening.
In accordance with mandates from the World Health Assembly, WHO supports countries to develop national strategies and plans of action to build health system resilience to climate change, to improve awareness and evidence of local climate impacts on health, as well as strengthening health system capacity to manage consequent health risks of extreme weather and climate change.
A joint WHO/World Meteorological Office office for climate and health was established in 2014. This office supports WHO to improve health preparedness and decision making through enhanced use of weather and climate information, including in relation to ENSO.
Related
Fact sheets
Feature stories

========================================
electricity-in-health-care-facilities
========================================
Electricity is needed to power the most basic services in health-care facilities, from lighting and communications to clean water supply. Reliable power is also crucial for the medical equipment necessary to safely manage childbirth or to ensure immunization as well as for undertaking most of the routine and emergency procedures. Reliable energy provision – particularly electricity – is a major enabler of universal health coverage. A number of clean and cost-effective energy solutions, such as based on solar photovoltaic systems, are available and rapidly deployable to electrify health-care facilities sustainably and increase their climate resiliency. Yet, as highlighted in the report Energizing health: accelerating electricity access in health-care facilities, close to 1 billion people in low- and lower-middle-income countries are estimated to be served by health-care facilities without reliable electricity access or with no electricity access at all. In low- and lower-middle-income countries of South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa, approximately 12% and 15% of health-care facilities, respectively, have no access to electricity whatsoever. There is a sharp urban–rural divide: urban health-care facilities often report more access to electricity and more reliable electricity than rural facilities in the same country.
Support, financing and investments need to be scaled up rapidly to accelerate health-care facility electrification. Other key actions include monitoring energy access in health-care facilities more systematically; providing the necessary resources to design and implement clean energy plans, tailored to the needs of the health sector; developing policy and finance schemes to unlock the potential of sustainable energy solutions, and to address the health sector needs.
Based on 27 low- and lower-middle-income countries that have national survey data on electrification status of health-care facilities for any year between 2015 and 2022, the following representative findings are found: Hospitals tend to fare better than non-hospitals, such as primary health centres, in access to any electricity supply or reliable electricity supply. There is also an urban–rural divide: urban health-care facilities often report more access to any electricity and more reliable electricity access than rural facilities in the same country.
A closer look at other indicators that provide more detailed information on health-care facility electricity supply in subsets of countries show that generators are often not operational and that facilities are often underserved, with energy supply being insufficient to cover all the needs of the facility.
Today, several solutions exist to electrify health-care facilities that were not available, or were too expensive, just a few years ago. For example, decentralized sustainable energy solutions based on solar photovoltaics and on batteries for storage are not only cost-effective and clean but rapidly deployable on site, without the need to wait for the arrival of the central grid. Decentralized renewable energy systems dramatically increase climate resilience of health-care facilities, making them independent from the diesel supply needed for generators while reducing carbon and other polluting emissions.
Technical solutions and enabling delivery models exist and have been demonstrated to be successful. It is essential to scale up investments and accelerate action to ensure reliable electricity to all health centers, including in remote and rural areas. The World Bank estimates that US$ 4.9 billion is urgently needed to bring health-care facilities in 63 low- and middle-income countries up to a minimal or intermediate level of electrification to ensure that all the essential health services are covered. Health is a human right and a public good. Significant policy changes and increased support are necessary to ensure that all health-care facilities have reliable electricity supply to address health inequities, achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development including universal health coverage, and mitigate climate change.
WHO supports countries ensure a reliable supply of electricity for health-care facilities by providing the knowledge and tools to a) understand the energy access situation and the energy needs of health-care facilities in their country, b) build the institutional capacity to identify the most suitable energy solutions to meet their needs, c) build an enabling framework to accelerate health-care facility electrification, and d) support high-level advocacy, coordination and mobilization of adequate resources for impact on the ground.
Establishing baselines and measuring progress is an essential step to identify gaps and priority needs for the allocation of limited resources. Building on the WHO health-care facility electrification database, WHO collects and analyzes data regarding the energy status of health infrastructure to measure progress on access to electricity as well as on access to reliable electricity, among other indicators.
WHO gathers lessons and good practices on electrification of health-care facilities. It identifies and consolidates key insights on successful and innovative policies, regulations, financing instruments, delivery models and support measures with countries as well as to identify priority actions to accelerate health-care facility electrification. Guidance and support to countries are provided via direct technical assistance as well as through the dissemination of reports and best practices, like those included in the Energizing health: accelerating electricity access in health-care facilities report. WHO provides direct technical support to countries, through regional and country offices, on techno-economic analyses for electrification of health-care facilities through decentralized renewable energies.
This activity includes support for:
WHO is working with UNICEF, GAVI, Selco Foundation and other partners to support countries on electrification of health-care facilities through decentralized solar systems. WHO also provides technical support to strengthen professional capacity of health workers at different levels, from central governments to local health centers. This activity aims to increase the ability of the local health sector to design, implement and maintain health-care facility electrification programmes. WHO also works with local stakeholders to strengthen the capacity of health-care facility staff to properly use the facility energy systems and undertake the basic maintenance.
WHO facilitates multisector cooperation and coordinated action among health and energy stakeholders to maximize impact and leverage on synergies on the ground. In this framework, WHO serves as Secretariat of the Health and Energy Platform of Action , facilitates the activities of the High-Level Coalition on Health and Energy convened by the WHO Director-General, and plays a crucial role in multi-stakeholder platforms relevant for health and energy, such as the climate change conferences of parties , UN Energy, and SDG 7 progress tracking.
Related
News

========================================
electronic-waste-(e-waste)
========================================
Every year millions of electrical and electronic devices are discarded as products break or become obsolete and are thrown away. These discarded devices are considered e-waste and can become a threat to health and the environment if they are not disposed of and recycled appropriately.
Common items in e-waste streams include computers, mobile phones, large household appliances, and medical equipment. Millions of tonnes of e-waste are recycled using unsound activities, as well as being stored in homes and warehouses, dumped, and illegally exported. When e-waste is recycling using unsound activities, it can release up to 1000 different chemical substances into the environment, including known neurotoxicants such as lead (3). Pregnant women and children are particularly vulnerable due to their pathways of exposure and developmental status. The International Labour Organization estimates that 16.5 million children were working in the industrial sector in 2020, of which waste processing is a subsector (4).
Electronic waste is one of the fastest growing solid waste streams in the world (1). Less than a quarter of e-waste produced globally in 2022 was known to be formally recycled; however, e-waste streams contain valuable and finite resources that can be reused if they are recycled appropriately. E-waste has therefore become an important income stream for individuals and some communities. People living in low- and middle-income , particularly children, face the most significant risks from e-waste due to lack of appropriate regulations and enforcement, recycling infrastructure and training. Despite international regulations targeting the control of the transport of e-waste from one country to another, its transboundary movement to LMICs continues, frequently illegally. E-waste is considered hazardous waste as it contains toxic materials and can produce toxic chemicals when recycled inappropriately. Many of these toxic materials are known or suspected to cause harm to human health, and several are included in the 10 chemicals of public health concern, including dioxins, lead and mercury. Inferior recycling of e-waste is a threat to public health and safety. Electrical and electronic items contain many different toxic substances. Users are unlikely to have contact with these substances while the items are functional. When they become waste, these toxicants can be released into the environment if the devices are managed using environmentally-unsound practices and activities. Many unsound practices have been observed at e-waste sites including: These activities are considered hazardous to the environment and health as they release toxic pollutants, contaminating the air, soil, dust, and water at recycling sites and in neighbouring communities. Open burning and heating are considered the most hazardous activities due to the toxic fumes created. Once in the environment, these toxic pollutants can travel significant distances from the point of pollution, exposing people in faraway areas to hazardous substances. Epidemiological research has posed several adverse health outcomes linked to informal and unsound e-waste recycling activities. Children and pregnant women are especially vulnerable to the effects of hazardous pollutants from informal e-waste recycling activities. Children are often involved in waste picking and scavenging, burning discarded e-waste and the manual dismantlement of items into component parts. In some countries, children may serve as a source of cheap labour and their small hands give them an advantage in taking apart the smallest items. These activities directly expose children to injury and high levels of hazardous substances. Working as a waste picker is hazardous labour and is considered one of the worst forms of child labour by the ILO. In 2020, the ILO estimated that as many as 16.5 million children globally were working in the industrial sector, of which waste processing is a subsector (4). It is unknown how many child labourers participate in informal e-waste recycling. E-waste exposure may be linked to the following health effects during pregnancy and in infants and children:
Children and pregnant women are at high risk to hazardous substances released through informal e-waste recycling activities due to their unique vulnerabilities. Children have different exposures to e-waste recycling activities than adults. E-waste recycling activities release toxic chemicals that can cross the placenta and may contaminate breastmilk, for example mercury. Fetuses and young children are highly sensitive to many pollutants released through e-waste recycling due to their rapidly developing bodies, including their respiratory, immune and central nervous systems. E-waste contains several known neurotoxicants, including lead and mercury, that may disrupt the development of the central nervous system during pregnancy, infancy, childhood and adolescence. Some harmful toxicants from e-waste may also impact the structural development and function of the lungs. Changes to children’s developing systems may cause irreparable harm and affect them for the rest of their lives.
National and international actions are essential to protect communities from unsound e-waste recycling activities. Actions that can be taken include: The Basel Convention controls the transboundary movement of hazardous wastes and their disposal. It is a comprehensive environmental agreement that aims to tackle issues surrounding hazardous wastes, including e-waste and its management. In 2019, the Ban Amendment to the Basel Convention entered into force. It prohibits the movement of hazardous wastes, including e-waste, from countries of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development , the European Commission countries and Liechtenstein to other states that are party to the Convention. The Basel Convention runs programmes and workshops to develop and deliver guidance on environmentally sound management of e-waste. It also provides states with guidelines to distinguish between waste and non-waste and the transboundary movement of e-waste. Regional conventions also exist, including the Bamako Convention and the Waigani Convention. Both regional conventions arose in response to the Basel Convention and aim to further restrict the movement of hazardous wastes, including e-waste, in African and South Pacific countries, respectively.
World Health Organization’s Initiative on E-waste and Child Health is contributing to a number of international e-waste programmes and pilot projects in countries in Latin America and Africa. These projects are developing frameworks to protect children’s health from e-waste exposures that can be adapted and replicated in other countries and settings. The Initiative aims to:
In 2021, WHO released its first global report on e-waste and child health, which called for greater effective and binding action to protect children from the growing threat. WHO has developed training tools for the health sector, including a training package for health care providers, including a specific training module on e-waste and child health. Additionally, WHO contributes to multi-agency capacity training tools, including a MOOC, a joint course with PAHO and the UNICEF-WHO Introduction to Children's Environmental Health.
References
Related
WHO's work on children's environmental healthWHO Initiative on E-waste and Child Health Children and digital dumpsites: e-waste exposure and child healthUNICEF-WHO Introduction to Children’s Environmental HealthPreventing impacts of electronic waste on child healthE-waste and child healthInternational Lead Poisoning Prevention WeekChildren and digital dumpsites: smaller hands, cheaper labour – the crisis of e-waste and children’s healthPAHO online training course on e-waste
News
Fact sheets
Feature stories

========================================
emergency-contraception
========================================
Emergency contraception refers to methods of contraception that can be used to prevent pregnancy after sexual intercourse. These are recommended for use within 5 days but are more effective the sooner they are used after the act of intercourse.
Emergency contraceptive pills prevent pregnancy by preventing or delaying ovulation and they do not induce an abortion. The copper-bearing IUD prevents fertilization by causing a chemical change in sperm and egg before they meet. Emergency contraception cannot interrupt an established pregnancy or harm a developing embryo.
Any woman or girl of reproductive age may need emergency contraception to avoid an unwanted pregnancy. There are no absolute medical contraindications to the use of emergency contraception. There are no age limits for the use of emergency contraception. Eligibility criteria for general use of a copper IUD also apply for use of a copper IUD for emergency purposes.
Emergency contraception can be used in a number of situations following sexual intercourse. These include:
An advance supply of ECPs may be given to a woman to ensure that she will have them available when needed and can take as soon as possible after unprotected intercourse. Following use of ECPs, women or girls may resume or initiate a regular method of contraception. If a copper IUD is used for emergency contraception, no additional contraceptive protection is needed. Following administration of ECPs with levonorgestrel or combined oral contraceptive pills , women or girls may resume their contraceptive method, or start any contraceptive method immediately, including a copper-bearing IUD. Following use of ECPs with ulipristal acetate , women or girls may resume or start any progestogen containing method on the 6th day after taking UPA. They can have an LNG-IUD inserted immediately if it can be determined they are not pregnant. They can have the copper IUD inserted immediately. The 4 methods of emergency contraception are:
WHO recommends any of the following drugs for emergency contraception:
A meta-analysis of two studies showed that women who used ECPs with UPA had a pregnancy rate of 1.2%. Studies have shown that ECPs with LNG had a pregnancy rate of 1.2% to 2.1% (1) (2). Ideally, ECPs with UPA, ECPs with LNG or COCs should be taken as early as possible after unprotected intercourse, within 120 hours. ECPs with UPA are more effective between 72–120 hours after unprotected intercourse than other ECPs. Side effects from the use of ECPs are similar to those of oral contraceptive pills, such as nausea and vomiting, slight irregular vaginal bleeding, and fatigue. Side effects are not common, they are mild, and will normally resolve without further medications. If vomiting occurs within 2 hours of taking a dose, the dose should be repeated. ECPs with LNG or with UPA are preferable to COCs because they cause less nausea and vomiting. Routine use of anti-emetics before taking ECPs is not recommended. Drugs used for emergency contraception do not harm future fertility. There is no delay in the return to fertility after taking ECPs. There are no restrictions for the medical eligibility of who can use ECPs. Some women, however, use ECPs repeatedly for any of the reasons stated above, or as their main method of contraception. In such situations, further counselling needs to be given on what other and more regular contraceptive options may be more appropriate and more effective. Frequent and repeated ECP use may be harmful for women with conditions classified as medical eligibility criteria category 2, 3,or 4 for combined hormonal contraception or Progestin-only contraceptives . Frequent use of emergency contraception can result in increased side-effects, such as menstrual irregularities, although their repeated use poses no known health risks.
Emergency contraceptive pills were found to be less effective in obese women , but there are no safety concerns. Obese women should not be denied access to emergency contraception when they need it.
Counselling for use of emergency contraceptive pills should include options for using regular contraception and advice on how to use methods correctly in case of perceived method failure.
WHO recommends that a copper-bearing IUD, when used as an emergency contraceptive method, be inserted within 5 days of unprotected intercourse. This method is particularly appropriate for women who would like to start using a highly effective, long-acting, and reversible contraceptive method.
When inserted within 120 hours of unprotected intercourse, a copper-bearing IUD is more than 99% effective in preventing pregnancy. This is the most effective form of emergency contraception available. Once inserted, women can continue to use the IUD as an ongoing method of contraception, or may choose to change to another contraceptive method. A copper-bearing IUD is a safe form of emergency contraception. It is estimated that there may be less than 2 cases of Pelvic Inflammatory Disease per 1000 users (3). . The risks of expulsion or perforation are low. Eligibility criteria for general use of a copper IUD also apply for use of a copper IUD for emergency purposes. Women with a condition classified as MEC category 3 or 4 (for example, with current PID, puerperal sepsis, unexplained vaginal bleeding, cervical cancer, or severe thrombocytopenia) for the copper IUD should not use a copper IUD for emergency purposes. In addition, a copper-bearing IUD should not be inserted for emergency contraception following sexual assault as the woman may be at high risk of a sexually transmitted infection such as chlamydia and gonorrhoea. A copper-bearing IUD should not be used as emergency contraception when a woman is already pregnant.
The WHO Medical eligibility criteria for contraceptive use states that IUD insertion may further increase the risk of PID among women at increased risk of sexually transmitted infections , although limited evidence suggests that this risk if low. Current algorithms for determining increased risk of STIs have poor predictive value. Risk of STIs varies by individual behaviour and local STI prevalence. Therefore, while many women at increased risk of STIs can generally have an IUD inserted, some women at a very high likelihood of STIs should generally not have an IUD inserted until appropriate testing and treatment occur. All women and girls at risk of an unintended pregnancy have a right to access emergency contraception and these methods should be routinely included within all national family planning programmes. Moreover, emergency contraception should be integrated into health care services for populations most at risk of exposure to unprotected sex, including post-sexual assault care and services for women and girls living in emergency and humanitarian settings.
WHO reaffirms its commitment to constantly reviewing emerging evidence through its Continuous Identification of Research Evidence system and also by regularly updating its guidance accordingly.
(1) Can we identify women at risk of pregnancy despite using emergency contraception? Data from randomized trials of ulipristal acetate and levonorgestrel.Glasier A, Cameron ST, Blithe D, Scherrer B, Mathe H, Levy D, et al. Contraception. 2011 Oct;84(4):363-7. doi: 10.1016/j.contraception.2011.02.009. Epub 2011 Apr 2. (2) Effect of BMI and body weight on pregnancy rates with LNG as emergency contraception: analysis of four WHO HRP studies.Festin MP, Peregoudov A, Seuc A, Kiarie J, Temmerman M. Contraception. 2017 Jan;95(1):50-54. doi: 10.1016/j.contraception.2016.08.001. Epub 2016 Aug 12. (3) Family planning: a global handbook for providers 2011 UpdateJohns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health/Center for Communication Programs and World Health Organization
Related
Fact sheets
More
Related documentsMedical eligibility criteria for contraceptive use Related documents

========================================
endometriosis
========================================
Endometriosis is a disease in which tissue similar to the lining of the uterus grows outside the uterus. It can cause severe pain in the pelvis and make it harder to get pregnant.
Endometriosis can start at a person’s first menstrual period and last until menopause.With endometriosis, tissue similar to the lining of the uterus grows outside the uterus. This leads to inflammation and scar tissue forming in the pelvic region and elsewhere in the body.The cause of endometriosis is unknown. There is no known way to prevent endometriosis. There is no cure, but its symptoms can be treated with medicines or, in some cases, surgery.
It causes a chronic inflammatory reaction that may result in the formation of scar tissue within the pelvis and other parts of the body. Several lesion types have been described: Endometriosis often causes severe pain in the pelvis, especially during menstrual periods. Some people also have pain during sex or when using the bathroom. Some people have trouble getting pregnant.Some people with endometriosis don’t have any symptoms. For those who do, a common symptom is pain in the lower part of the belly . Pain may be most noticeable: Some people also experience: Symptoms often improve after menopause, but not always.
Endometriosis symptoms are variable and broad, meaning that healthcare workers may not easily diagnose it. Individuals with symptoms may not be aware of the condition.
Endometriosis is a complex disease that affects many women globally from the onset of their first period through menopause, regardless of ethnic origin or social status. Many different factors are thought to contribute to its development. At present endometriosis is thought to arise due to: Other factors may also contribute to the growth or persistence of ectopic endometrial tissue. For example, endometriosis is known to be dependent on estrogen, which increases the inflammation, growth and pain associated with the disease. However, the relationship between estrogen and endometriosis is complex since the absence of estrogen does not always mean the absence of endometriosis. Endometriosis has significant social, public health and economic implications. It can decrease quality of life due to severe pain, fatigue, depression, anxiety and infertility. Some individuals with endometriosis experience debilitating pain that prevents them from going to work or school. Painful sex due to endometriosis can lead to interruption or avoidance of intercourse and affect the sexual health of affected individuals and their partners. Addressing endometriosis will empower those affected by it by supporting their human right to the highest standard of sexual and reproductive health, quality of life and overall well-being.
At present, there is no known way to prevent endometriosis. Enhanced awareness, followed by early diagnosis and management may slow or halt the natural progression of the disease and reduce the long-term burden of its symptoms, including possibly the risk of central nervous system pain sensitization. Currently there is no cure. A careful history of menstrual symptoms and chronic pelvic pain provides the basis for suspecting endometriosis. Although several screening tools and tests have been proposed and tested, none are currently validated to accurately identify or predict individuals or populations that are most likely to have the disease. Endometriosis can often present symptoms that mimic other conditions and contribute to a diagnostic delay. Ovarian endometrioma, adhesions and deep nodular forms of disease often require ultrasonography or magnetic resonance imaging to detect. Histologic verification, usually following surgical/laparoscopic visualization, can be useful in confirming diagnosis, particularly for the most common superficial lesions. The need for histologic/laparoscopic confirmation should not prevent the commencement of empirical medical treatment. Treatments to manage endometriosis can vary based on the severity of symptoms and whether pregnancy is desired. No treatments cure the disease.
A range of medications can help manage endometriosis and its symptoms.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and analgesics like ibuprofen and naproxen are often used to treat pain. Hormonal medicines like GnRH-analogues and contraceptive methods can also help control pain. These methods include:
These methods may not be suitable for those wanting to get pregnant.Fertility medicines and procedures are sometimes used for those having difficulty getting pregnant because of endometriosis. Surgery is sometimes used to remove endometriosis lesions, adhesions and scar tissues. Laparoscopic surgery allows doctors to keep incisions small. Discuss your treatment options with a health care provider. Treatments are based on individual preferences and effectiveness, side effects, long-term safety, costs and availability. Raising awareness can help people to be diagnosed early. Early treatment can slow or halt the natural progression of the disease and reduce the long-term symptoms.In addition to talking to their doctor, people may find additional advice and emotional assistance in local patient support groups. Some treatments are associated with side effects, and endometriosis-related symptoms can sometimes reappear after therapy ends. The choice of treatment depends on effectiveness in the individual, adverse side effects, long-term safety, costs, and availability. Most current hormonal management is not suitable for persons suffering from endometriosis who wish to get pregnant, since they affect ovulation.Success in reducing pain symptoms and increasing pregnancy rates through surgery are often dependent on the extent of disease. In addition, lesions may recur even after successful eradication, and pelvic floor muscle abnormalities can contribute to chronic pelvic pain. Secondary changes of the pelvis, including the pelvic floor, and central sensitization may benefit from physiotherapy and complementary treatments in some patients. Treatment options for infertility due to endometriosis include laparoscopic surgical removal of endometriosis, ovarian stimulation with intrauterine insemination , and in vitro fertilization , but success rates vary. In many countries, the general public and most front-line healthcare providers are not aware that distressing and life-altering pelvic pain is not normal, leading to a normalization and stigmatization of symptoms and significant diagnostic delay. Patients who could benefit from medical symptomatic management are not always provided with treatments due to limited awareness of endometriosis among primary healthcare providers. Due to diagnostic delays, prompt access to available treatment methods, including non-steroidal analgesics , oral contraceptives and progestin-based contraceptives is often not achieved. Due to limited capacity of health systems in many countries, access to specialized surgery for those who need it is sub-optimal. In addition, and especially in low and middle-income countries, there is a lack of multi-disciplinary teams with the wide range of skills and equipment needed for the early diagnosis and effective treatment of endometriosis. Although primary health care professionals should play a role in screening and basic management of endometriosis, tools to screen and accurately predict patients and populations who are most likely to have the disease are lacking. In addition, many knowledge gaps exist, and there is need for non-invasive diagnostic methods as well as medical treatments that do not prevent pregnancy. Addressing these issues is the current focus of endometriosis response.
The World Health Organization recognizes the importance of endometriosis and its impact on people’s sexual and reproductive health, quality of life and overall well-being. WHO aims to stimulate and support the adoption of effective policies and interventions to address endometriosis globally, especially in low and middle-income countries. WHO is partnering with multiple stakeholders, including academic institutions, non-state actors and other organizations that are actively involved in research to identify effective models of endometriosis prevention, diagnosis, treatment, and care. WHO recognizes the importance of advocating for increased awareness, policies and services for endometriosis, and collaborates with civil society and endometriosis patient support groups in this regard. WHO is also collaborating with relevant stakeholders to facilitate and support the collection and analysis of country- and region-specific endometriosis prevalence data for decision making. Related
Fact sheets

========================================
epilepsy
========================================
Epilepsy is a chronic noncommunicable disease of the brain that affects around 50 million people worldwide. It is characterized by recurrent seizures, which are brief episodes of involuntary movement that may involve a part of the body or the entire body and are sometimes accompanied by loss of consciousness and control of bowel or bladder function.
Seizure episodes are a result of excessive electrical discharges in a group of brain cells. Different parts of the brain can be the site of such discharges. Seizures can vary from the briefest lapses of attention or muscle jerks to severe and prolonged convulsions. Seizures can also vary in frequency, from less than one per year to several per day.
One seizure does not signify epilepsy . Epilepsy is defined as having two or more unprovoked seizures. Epilepsy is one of the world’s oldest recognized conditions, with written records dating back to 4000 BCE. Fear, misunderstanding, discrimination and social stigma have surrounded epilepsy for centuries. This stigma continues in many countries today and can impact on the quality of life for people with the disease and their families.
Characteristics of seizures vary and depend on where in the brain the disturbance first starts, and how far it spreads. Temporary symptoms occur, such as loss of awareness or consciousness, and disturbances of movement, sensation , mood, or other cognitive functions.
People with epilepsy tend to have more physical problems , as well as higher rates of psychological conditions, including anxiety and depression. Similarly, the risk of premature death in people with epilepsy is up to three times higher than in the general population, with the highest rates of premature mortality found in low- and middle-income countries and in rural areas.
A great proportion of the causes of death related to epilepsy, especially in low- and middle-income countries, are potentially preventable, such as falls, drowning, burns and prolonged seizures.
Epilepsy accounts for a significant proportion of the world’s disease burden, affecting around 50 million people worldwide. The estimated proportion of the general population with active epilepsy at a given time is between 4 and 10 per 1000 people.
Globally, an estimated 5 million people are diagnosed with epilepsy each year. In high-income countries, there are estimated to be 49 per 100 000 people diagnosed with epilepsy each year. In low- and middle-income countries, this figure can be as high as 139 per 100 000. This is likely due to the increased risk of endemic conditions such as malaria or neurocysticercosis; the higher incidence of road traffic injuries; birth-related injuries; and variations in medical infrastructure, the availability of preventive health programmes and accessible care. Close to 80% of people with epilepsy live in low- and middle-income countries.
Epilepsy is not contagious. Although many underlying disease mechanisms can lead to epilepsy, the cause of the disease is still unknown in about 50% of cases globally. The causes of epilepsy are divided into the following categories: structural, genetic, infectious, metabolic, immune and unknown. Examples include:
Seizures can be controlled. Up to 70% of people living with epilepsy could become seizure free with appropriate use of antiseizure medicines. Discontinuing antiseizure medicine can be considered after 2 years without seizures and should take into account relevant clinical, social and personal factors. A documented etiology of the seizure and an abnormal electroencephalography pattern are the two most consistent predictors of seizure recurrence.
An estimated 25% of epilepsy cases are potentially preventable.
Epilepsy accounts for more than 0.5% of the global burden of disease, a time-based measure that combines years of life lost due to premature mortality and time lived in less than full health. Epilepsy has significant economic implications in terms of health-care needs, premature death and lost work productivity.
Out-of-pocket costs and productivity losses can create substantial burdens on households. An economic study from India estimated that public financing for both first- and second-line therapy and other medical costs alleviates the financial burden from epilepsy and is cost-effective.
The stigma and discrimination that surround epilepsy worldwide are often more difficult to overcome than the seizures themselves. People living with epilepsy and their families can be targets of prejudice. Pervasive myths that epilepsy is incurable, or contagious, or a result of morally bad behaviour can keep people isolated and discourage them from seeking treatment. People with epilepsy can experience reduced access to educational opportunities, a withholding of the opportunity to obtain a driving license, barriers to enter particular occupations, and reduced access to health and life insurance. In many countries legislation reflects centuries of misunderstanding about epilepsy, for example, laws which permit the annulment of a marriage on the grounds of epilepsy and laws that deny people with seizures access to restaurants, theatres, recreational centres and other public buildings.
Legislation based on internationally accepted human rights standards can prevent discrimination and rights violations, improve access to health-care services, and raise the quality of life for people with epilepsy.
The ﬁrst global report on epilepsy produced in 2019 by WHO and key partners, Epilepsy: A public health imperative, highlighted the available evidence on the burden of epilepsy and the public health response required at global, regional and national levels.
The 75th WHA adopted the Intersectoral global action plan on epilepsy and other neurological disorders 2022–2031, which recognizes the shared preventive, pharmacological and psychosocial approaches between epilepsy and other neurological disorders that can serve as valuable entry points for accelerating and strengthening services and support for these conditions.
Recently, WHO published an epilepsy technical brief, which outlines actions for policy makers and healthcare planners to reduce the burden of epilepsy in countries through finding and prioritizing the most effective solutions in a wide range of societal sectors.
WHO, the International League Against Epilepsy and the International Bureau for Epilepsy led the Global Campaign Against Epilepsy to bring the disease out of the shadows to provide better information and raise awareness about epilepsy and to strengthen public and private efforts to improve care and reduce the disease’s impact.
These efforts have contributed to the prioritization of epilepsy in many countries and projects have been carried out to reduce the treatment gap and morbidity of people with epilepsy, to train and educate health professionals, to dispel stigma, to identify potential prevention strategies, and to develop models integrating epilepsy care into local health systems. Combining several innovative strategies, these projects have shown that there are simple, cost-effective ways to treat epilepsy in low-resource settings. The WHO Programme on reducing the epilepsy treatment gap and the mental health Gap Action Programme achieved these goals in Ghana, Mozambique, Myanmar and Viet Nam, where 6.5 million more people have access to treatment for epilepsy should they need it.
Related Features
Fact sheets

========================================
essential-medicines
========================================
Essential medicines are those that effectively and safely treat the priority healthcare needs of the population. They are selected by taking into consideration public health relevance, evidence of benefits and harms, and with consideration of costs, affordability and other relevant factors. Essential medicines should always be available within functioning health systems, in sufficient quantities to meet patient needs. They should be available in appropriate dosage forms for the intended uses and patients, be of assured quality, and be affordable for both individuals and the health system.
While essential medicines cover a wide range of global health needs, they represent only a small proportion of the total number of medicines available globally. The use of a limited number of carefully selected medicines can lead to improved supply, better prescribing practices and lower costs.
Every 2 years since 1977, WHO has published the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines .
Over 150 countries have adopted national lists of essential medicines based on the WHO Model List. Essential medicines lists serve as a basis for procurement and supply of medicines in the public sector, reimbursement and insurance schemes, medicine donations and local medicine production (1). When properly implemented, the essential medicines concept can help improve health outcomes and achieve progress towards universal health coverage. The essential medicines concept has been successfully implemented in various countries and regions. Studies have shown that essential medicines lists are associated with greater availability of essential medicines than non-essential medicines (2), increased access (3), better prescribing and quality of care, and cost savings (4).
The essential medicines concept can be adapted to different healthcare systems, settings and income levels. By focusing on a limited number of carefully selected medicines, countries can improve supply, promote more rational prescribing practices and better control costs while ensuring access to essential medicines.
Despite progress, challenges remain in ensuring universal access to essential medicines. Availability and affordability of essential medicines remain issues in many countries.
The high cost of new essential medicines, particularly for cancer and other noncommunicable diseases, poses challenges for health systems across all income settings.
Global Health Observatory data from 2010–2019 show that the proportion of health facilities with a core set of relevant essential medicines available and affordable on a sustainable basis in selected low- and lower-middle-income countries ranged from 8% to 41%.
Medicines account for 20–60% of health spending in developing countries, with up to 90% of the population purchasing medicines through out-of-pocket payments, making medicines the largest family expenditure item after food. This means medicines are unaffordable for large sections of the global population and a major burden on government budgets. Antimicrobial resistance continues to threaten the effectiveness of many essential antibiotics, necessitating careful stewardship.
The first WHO Model List of Essential Medicines was published in 1977 and included about 200 medicines. It was seen as a major revolution in public health, highlighting that some medicines are more important than others.
In 2007, the first Model List of Essential Medicines for Children was published in recognition of the unique needs of children. This was a major achievement, particularly in promoting research into medicines for children and the development of child-friendly formulations.
Over the years, the Model Lists have expanded in scope and complexity, reflecting advances in medical science, and changing global health priorities.
The WHO Model List is reviewed and updated every two years following a well-established, rigorous, transparent and evidence-based process.
Requests for changes to the WHO Model List, (such as the addition of new medicines or formulations, removal of medicines or formulations, or expanding the listing of a medicine to include a new indication), are made through an open application process. Applications may be submitted by anyone, including scientific researchers, academic institutions, non-governmental organizations, patient groups or networks, pharmaceutical companies and WHO technical departments.
Applications are reviewed by the WHO Expert Committee on Selection and Use of Essential Medicines, whose responsibility it is to consider the evidence presented and make recommendations to WHO regarding the requested changes.
Members of the Expert Committee are appointed by the WHO Director-General. They are required to have strong clinical and technical expertise in medicine evaluation and clinical use. They are selected to ensure gender balance and equitable geographical representation. Expert Committee members must disclose any circumstances that could result in a potential conflict of interest.
All applications received for consideration by the Expert Committee are published on the WHO website for public review and comment. Comments received on the applications, application reviews provided by Expert Committee members, and comments from WHO technical departments are also published on the website for full transparency.
This transparent, evidence-based process ensures that the WHO Model List remains a credible and valuable tool for guiding medicine selection and use globally.
The WHO Model List of Essential Medicines has evolved significantly since its inception, reflecting its relevance to all countries, not just those with limited resources.
Since the first Model List in 1977, the number and scope of essential medicines included in the Model List have grown over time. Medicines requiring specialized medical care have been introduced, such as lung surfactants for newborn babies, targeted cancer treatments and medicines for multiple sclerosis. The Model List has also included more treatments for chronic and noncommunicable diseases, reflecting the changing global disease burden and aging populations.
While the cost of a medicine is a consideration in the selection process, a high absolute cost of a medicine does not necessarily prevent it from being added to the WHO Model List if it otherwise meets the required selection criteria. Since 2002, affordability has evolved from being a precondition of listing a medicine on the Model list to being a consequence. Listing a medicine on the Model List is one step in a series of actions that can lead to lower costs, better affordability and greater access.
The number of patented medicines on the Model List has increased over time from 17/319 (5%) in 2003 to 82/502 in 2023.
In 2017, in response to the growing threat of antimicrobial resistance, the WHO Model List introduced the AWaRe classification of antibiotics. The AWaRe classification guides the empiric use of essential antibiotics for more than 30 clinical infections in community and hospital settings. It has formed the basis of broader guidance for optimal antibiotic prescribing and use, supporting antimicrobial stewardship. (5).
WHO continues to work to improve global access to essential medicines, regularly updating the WHO Model Lists of Essential Medicines and providing technical support to Member States to support them in implementing the 2014 World Health Assembly Resolution on Access to essential medicines .
Improving access and affordability of essential medicines forms an important part of WHO’s broader efforts to improve access and affordability of all essential health products – including medicines, assistive technologies, in vitro diagnostics, medical devices, and vaccines – as a key strategy for supporting countries to attain the goal of universal health coverage. References
Related
Fact sheets

========================================
falls
========================================
Globally, falls are a major public health problem. An estimated 684 000 fatal falls occur each year, making it the second leading cause of unintentional injury death, after road traffic injuries. Over 80% of fall-related fatalities occur in low- and middle-income countries, with regions of the Western Pacific and South East Asia accounting for 60% of these deaths. In all regions of the world, death rates are highest among adults over the age of 60 years.
Though not fatal, approximately 37.3 million falls severe enough to require medical attention occur each year. Globally, falls are responsible for over 38 million DALYs lost each year(2), and result in more years lived with disability than transport injury, drowning, burns and poisoning combined. While nearly 40% of the total DALYs lost due to falls worldwide occurs in children, this measurement may not accurately reflect the impact of fall-related disabilities for older individuals who have fewer life years to lose. In addition, those individuals who fall and suffer a disability, particularly older people, are at a major risk for subsequent long-term care and institutionalization. The financial costs from fall-related injuries are substantial. For people aged 65 years or older, the average health system cost per fall injury in the Republic of Finland and Australia are US$ 3611 and US$ 1049 respectively. Evidence from Canada suggests the implementation of effective prevention strategies with a subsequent 20% reduction in the incidence of falls among children under 10 years of age could create a net savings of over US$ 120 million each year.
While all people who fall are at risk of injury, the age, gender and health of the individual can affect the type and severity of injury. Age is one of the key risk factors for falls. Older people have the highest risk of death or serious injury arising from a fall and the risk increases with age. For example, in the United States of America, 20–30% of older people who fall suffer moderate to severe injuries such as bruises, hip fractures, or head trauma. This risk level may be in part due to physical, sensory, and cognitive changes associated with ageing, in combination with environments that are not adapted for an ageing population. Another high risk group is children. Childhood falls occur largely as a result of their evolving developmental stages, innate curiosity in their surroundings, and increasing levels of independence that coincide with more challenging behaviours commonly referred to as ‘risk taking’. While inadequate adult supervision is a commonly cited risk factor, the circumstances are often complex, interacting with poverty, sole parenthood, and particularly hazardous environments.
Across all age groups and regions, both genders are at risk of falls. In some countries, it has been noted that males are more likely to die from a fall, while females suffer more non-fatal falls. Older women and younger children are especially prone to falls and increased injury severity. Worldwide, males consistently sustain higher death rates and DALYs lost. Possible explanations of the greater burden seen among males may include higher levels of risk-taking behaviours and hazards within occupations. Other risk factors include:
A range of interventions exist to prevent falls across the life-course. These include, but are not limited to, the following:
For children and adolescents
For workers
For older people
In addition to the interventions mentioned above there are others that are considered prudent to implement despite the fact that they may never have a body of research to support them. This is because the nature of the intervention is such that they are unlikely to be the subject of high-quality research studies either due to difficulties in performing the required research, or because the interventions seem so basic or fundamental that research is not deemed necessary. Examples of such interventions include:
(1)Within the WHO Global Health Estimates, fall-related deaths and non-fatal injuries exclude falls due to assault and self-harm; falls from animals, burning buildings, transport vehicles; and falls into fire, water and machinery. (2)The disability-adjusted life year extends the concept of potential years of life lost due to premature death to include equivalent years of “healthy” life lost by virtue of being in states of poor health or disability. Related
News
Fact sheets
Events

========================================
family-planning-contraception
========================================
There are many different types of contraception, but not all types are appropriate for all situations. The most appropriate method of birth control depends on an individual’s overall health, age, frequency of sexual activity, number of sexual partners, desire to have children in the future, and family history of certain diseases. Ensuring access for all people to their preferred contraceptive methods advances several human rights including the right to life and liberty, freedom of opinion, expression and choice and the right to work and education, as well as bringing significant health and other benefits.
Use of contraception prevents pregnancy-related health risks for women, especially for adolescent girls, and when expressed in terms of interbirth intervals, children born within 2 years of an elder sibling have a 60% increased risk of infant death, and those born within 2–3 years a 10% increased risk, compared with those born after an interval of 3 years or longer (4). It offers a range of potential non-health benefits that encompass expanded education opportunities and empowerment for women, and sustainable population growth and economic development for countries.
The number of women desiring to use family planning has increased markedly over the past two decades, from 900 million in 2000 to nearly 1.1 billion in 2021 (1).
Between 2000 and 2020, the number of women using a modern contraceptive method increased from 663 million to 851 million. An additional 70 million women are projected to be added by 2030. Between 2000 and 2020, the contraceptive prevalence rate increased from 47.7 to 49.0% (5).
The proportion of women of reproductive age who have their need for family planning satisfied with modern methods is 77.5% globally in 2022, a 10% increase since 1990 (2).
The proportion of women of reproductive age who have their need for family planning satisfied with modern methods is 77.5% globally in 2022, an increase of 10 percentage points since 1990 (2). Reasons for this slow increase include limited choice of methods; limited access to services, particularly among young, poorer and unmarried people; fear or experience of side-effects; cultural or religious opposition; poor quality of available services; users’ and providers’ bias against some methods; and gender-based barriers to accessing services. As these barriers are addressed in some regions there have been increases in demand satisfied with modern methods of contraception.
Methods of contraception include oral contraceptive pills, implants, injectables, patches, vaginal rings, intra uterine devices, condoms, male and female sterilization, lactational amenorrhea methods, withdrawal and fertility awareness-based methods. These methods have different mechanisms of action and effectiveness in preventing unintended pregnancy. Effectiveness of methods is measured by the number of pregnancies per 100 women using the method per year. Methods are classified by their effectiveness as commonly used into: For details on the mechanism of action and effectiveness of different contraceptive methods, click here. Achieving universal access and the realization of sexual and reproductive health services will be essential to fulfil the pledge of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development that “no one will be left behind”. It will require intensified support for contraceptive services, including through the implementation of effective government policies and programmes. WHO is working to promote contraception by producing evidence-based guidelines on safety and service delivery of contraceptive methods and on ensuring human rights in contraceptive programmes. WHO assists countries to adapt and implement these tools to strengthen contraceptive policies and programmes. Additionally, WHO participates in developing new contraceptive technologies to and leads and conducts implementation research for expanding access to and strengthening delivery contraceptive information and services.
References
1. United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division . World Family Planning 2022: Meeting the changing needs for family planning: Contraceptive use by age and method. UN DESA/POP/2022/TR/NO. 4 (https://www.un.org/development/desa/pd/sites/www.un.org.development.desa.pd/files/files/documents/2023/Feb/undesa_pd_2022_world-family-planning.pdf).
2. United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division . Estimates and Projections of Family Planning Indicators 2022.
3. United Nations Population Division: https://www.un.org/development/desa/pd/
4. Cleland J, Conde-Agudelo A, Peterson H, Ross J, Tsui A. Contraception and health. Lancet. 2012;380 :149-156. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(12)60609-6 5. United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division . World Family Planning 2020 Highlights: Accelerating action to ensure universal access to family planning .
Related
News
Fact sheets
Documents

========================================
female-genital-mutilation
========================================
Female genital mutilation comprises all procedures that involve partial or total removal of the external female genitalia, or other injury to the female genital organs for non-medical reasons. The practice has no health benefits for girls and women and can result in severe bleeding and problems urinating, and later cysts, menstrual difficulties, infections, as well as complications in childbirth and increased risk of newborn deaths.
The practice of FGM is recognized internationally as a violation of the human rights of girls and women. It reflects deep-rooted inequality between the sexes and constitutes an extreme form of discrimination against girls and women. It is nearly always carried out on minors and is a violation of the rights of children. The practice also violates a person's right to health, security and physical integrity; the right to be free from torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment; and the right to life, in instances when the procedure results in death. In several settings, there is evidence suggesting greater involvement of health workers in performing FGM due to the belief that the procedure is safer when medicalized. WHO strongly urges health workers not to perform FGM and has developed a global strategy and specific materials to support the health sector and health workers themselves to end FGM medicalization. Female genital mutilation is classified into 4 major types:
Type 1: This is the partial or total removal of the clitoral glans , and/or the prepuce/clitoral hood .
Type 2: This is the partial or total removal of the clitoral glans and the labia minora , with or without removal of the labia majora .
Type 3: Also known as infibulation, this is the narrowing of the vaginal opening through the creation of a covering seal. The seal is formed by cutting and repositioning the labia minora, or labia majora, sometimes through stitching, with or without removal of the clitoral prepuce/clitoral hood and glans.
Type 4: This includes all other harmful procedures to the female genitalia for non-medical purposes, e.g., pricking, piercing, incising, scraping and cauterizing the genital area.
FGM has no health benefits, and it harms girls and women in many ways. It involves removing and damaging healthy and normal female genital tissue, and it interferes with the natural functions of girls' and women's bodies. Although all forms of FGM are associated with increased risk of health complications, the risk is greater with more severe forms of FGM.
Immediate complications of FGM can include:
Long-term complications can include:
FGM is mostly carried out on young girls between infancy and adolescence, and occasionally on adult women. According to available data from 31 countries where FGM is practiced in the western, eastern, and north-eastern regions of Africa, and some countries in the Middle East and Asia, more than 230 million girls and women alive today have been subjected to the practice with more than 4 million girls estimated to be at risk of FGM annually. FGM is therefore of global concern.
The reasons why FGM is performed vary from one region to another as well as over time and include a mix of sociocultural factors within families and communities. There are many reasons why health-care providers perform FGM. These include:
However, with WHO’s support and training, many health care providers are becoming advocates for FGM abandonment within the clinical setting and with their families and communities. In 2008, the World Health Assembly passed resolution WHA61.16 on the elimination of FGM, emphasizing the need for concerted action in all sectors: health, education, finance, justice and women's affairs.
WHO supports a holistic health sector response to FGM prevention and care, by developing guidance and resources for health workers to prevent FGM and manage its complications and by supporting countries to adapt and implement these resources to local contexts. WHO also generates evidence to improve the understanding of FGM and what works to end this harmful practice. Since then, WHO has developed a global strategy against FGM medicalization with partner organizations and continues to support countries in its implementation. Related
News
Feature stories
Documents

========================================
food-additives
========================================
Many different food additives have been developed over time to meet the needs of large-scale food processing. Additives are added to ensure processed food remains safe and in good condition throughout its journey from factories or industrial kitchens, to warehouses and shops, and finally to consumers. Additives are also used to modify the sensory properties of foods including taste, smell, texture and appearance. Food additives can be derived from plants, animals or minerals, or they can be chemically synthesized. There are several thousand food additives used, all of which are designed to do a specific job. Food additives can be grouped into 3 broad categories based on their function.
Flavouring agents are chemicals that impart flavours or fragrances and are added to food to modify its aroma or taste. They are the most common type of additive used in foods, with hundreds of varieties used in a wide variety of foods, from confectionery and soft drinks to cereal, cake and yoghurt. Flavouring agents can be extracted from naturally occurring sources or chemically synthesized. Flavours extracted directly from naturally occurring sources are often referred to as natural flavours. Such flavours can also be chemically synthesized and are sometimes referred to as nature made or nature identical to indicate that although the flavour molecule itself is naturally occurring it hasn’t been extracted from its source, but synthesized to be identical. Artificial flavouring agents are chemicals that do not exist in nature but are synthesized to imitate natural flavours or elicit other taste sensations. Culinary ingredients, including spices, nuts and dried fruits or vegetables, can also modify aroma or taste, but are generally not considered flavouring agents. Enzyme preparations are a type of additive that may or may not end up in the final food product. Enzymes are naturally occurring proteins that boost biochemical reactions by breaking down larger molecules into their smaller building blocks. They can be obtained by extraction from plants or animal products or from micro-organisms such as bacteria and are used as alternatives to chemical-based technology. They are mainly used in baking , for manufacturing fruit juices , in wine making and brewing , as well as in cheese manufacturing .
Other food additives are used for a variety of reasons, such as preservation, colouring and sweetening. They are added when food is prepared, packaged, transported, or stored, and they eventually become a component of the food.
Preservatives can slow decomposition caused by mould, air, bacteria or yeast. In addition to maintaining the quality of the food, preservatives help control contamination that can cause foodborne illness, including life-threatening botulism.
Colouring is added to food to replace colours lost during processing or other production, or to make food appear more attractive.
Non-sugar sweeteners are often used as an alternative to sugar because they contribute fewer or no calories when added to food. WHO has issued a recommendation against the use of non-sugar sweeteners in general, based on evidence that they don’t seem to benefit long term weight loss or maintenance and may increase risk of noncommunicable diseases. Food additives are assessed for potential harmful effects on human health before they are approved for use. Authoritative bodies at the national, regional and international levels are responsible for evaluating the safety of food additives. The Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives is the international body responsible for evaluating the safety of food additives for use in foods that are traded internationally.
WHO, in cooperation with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations , is responsible for assessing the risks to human health from food additives. Risk assessments of food additives are conducted by an independent, international expert scientific group – the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives .
Only food additives that have undergone a JECFA safety assessment and are found not to present an appreciable health risk to consumers can be used internationally. This applies whether food additives come from natural sources or they are synthetic. National authorities, either based on the JECFA assessment or a national assessment, can then authorize the use of food additives at specified levels for specific foods.
JECFA evaluations are based on scientific reviews of all available biochemical, toxicological, and other relevant data on a given additive – mandatory tests in animals, research studies and observations in humans are considered. The toxicological tests required by JECFA include acute, short-term and long-term studies that determine how the food additive is absorbed, distributed and excreted, and possible harmful effects of the additive or its by-products at certain exposure levels.
The starting point for determining whether a food additive can be used without having harmful effects is to establish the acceptable daily intake . The ADI is an estimate of the amount of an additive in food or drinking water that can be safely consumed daily over a lifetime without adverse health effects.
The safety assessments completed by JECFA are used by the joint intergovernmental food standard-setting body of FAO and WHO, the Codex Alimentarius Commission, to establish levels for maximum use of additives in food and drinks. Codex standards are the reference for national standards for consumer protection, and for the international trade in food, so that consumers everywhere can be confident that the food they eat meets the agreed standards for safety and quality, no matter where it was produced.
Once a food additive has been found to be safe for use by JECFA and maximum use levels have been established in the Codex General Standard for Food Additives, national food regulations need to be implemented permitting the actual use of a food additive.
The Codex Alimentarius Commission also establishes standards and guidelines on food labelling. These standards are implemented in most countries, and food manufacturers are obliged to indicate which additives are in their products. In the European Union, for example, there is legislation governing labelling of food additives according to a set of pre-defined E-numbers. People who have allergies or sensitivities to certain food additives should check labels carefully.
WHO encourages national authorities to monitor and ensure that food additives in food and drinks produced in their countries comply with permitted uses, conditions and legislation. National authorities should oversee the food business, which carries the primary responsibility for ensuring that the use of a food additive is safe and complies with legislation.
Related
Fact sheets

========================================
food-safety
========================================
Access to sufficient amounts of safe and nutritious food is key to sustaining life and promoting good health. Unsafe food containing harmful bacteria, viruses, parasites or chemical substances causes more than 200 diseases, ranging from diarrhoea to cancers. It also creates a vicious cycle of disease and malnutrition, particularly affecting infants, young children, elderly and the sick. Good collaboration between governments, food producers and consumers is needed to help ensure food safety and stronger food systems.
Foodborne illnesses are usually infectious or toxic in nature and caused by bacteria, viruses, parasites or chemical substances entering the body through contaminated food. Chemical contamination can lead to acute poisoning or long-term diseases, such as cancer. Many foodborne diseases may lead to long-lasting disability and death. Some examples of food hazards are listed below.
Salmonella, Campylobacter and enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli are some of the most common foodborne pathogens that affect millions of people annually, sometimes with severe and fatal outcomes. Symptoms can include fever, headache, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain and diarrhoea. Foods more frequently involved in outbreaks of salmonellosis include eggs, poultry and other products of animal origin. Foodborne cases due to Campylobacter are mainly caused by raw milk, raw or undercooked poultry and drinking water. Enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli is often associated with unpasteurized milk, undercooked meat and contaminated fresh fruits and vegetables.
Listeria infections can lead to miscarriage in pregnant women or death of newborn babies. Although disease occurrence is relatively low, Listeria’s severe and sometimes fatal health consequences, particularly among infants, children and the elderly, count them among the most serious foodborne infections. Listeria is found in unpasteurised dairy products and various ready-to-eat foods and can grow at refrigeration temperatures.
Vibrio cholerae can infect people through contaminated water or food. Symptoms may include abdominal pain, vomiting and profuse watery diarrhoea, which quickly lead to severe dehydration and possibly death. Raw vegetablesand various types of raw or undercooked seafood have been implicated in cholera outbreaks.
Antimicrobials, such as antibiotics, are essential to treat infections caused by bacteria, including foodborne pathogens. However, their overuse and misuse in veterinary and human medicine has been linked to the emergence and spread of resistant bacteria, rendering the treatment of infectious diseases ineffective in animals and humans.
Some viruses can be transmitted by food consumption. Norovirus is a common cause of foodborne infections that is characterized by nausea, explosive vomiting, watery diarrhoea and abdominal pain. Hepatitis A virus can also be transmitted by food and can cause long-lasting liver disease and typically spreads through raw or undercooked seafood or contaminated raw produce.
Some parasites, such as fish-borne trematodes, are only transmitted through food. Others, for example tapeworms like Echinococcus spp, or Taenia spp, may infect people through food or direct contact with animals. Other parasites, such as Ascaris, Cryptosporidium, Entamoeba histolytica or Giardia, enter the food chain via water or soil and can contaminate fresh produce.
Prions, infectious agents composed of protein, are unique in that they are associated with specific forms of neurodegenerative disease. Bovine spongiform encephalopathy is a prion disease in cattle, associated with the variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in humans. Consuming meat products containing specified risk material, such as brain tissue, is the most likely route of transmission of the prion agent to humans.
Of most concern for health are naturally occurring toxins and environmental pollutants.
Other chemical hazards in food can include radioactive nucleotides that can be discharged into the environment from industries and from civil or military nuclear operations, food allergens, residues of drugs and other contaminants incorporated in the food during the process.
The burden of foodborne diseases on public health and economies has often been underestimated due to underreporting and difficulty in establishing causal relationships between food contamination and resulting illness or death.
The 2015 WHO report on the estimates of the global burden of foodborne diseases presented the first-ever estimates of disease burden caused by 31 foodborne agents at global and sub-regional levels, highlighting that more than 600 million cases of foodborne illnesses and 420 000 deaths could occur in a year. The burden of foodborne diseases falls disproportionately on groups in vulnerable situations and especially on children under 5, with the highest burden in low- and middle-income countries.
The 2019 World Bank report on the economic burden of foodborne diseases indicated that the total productivity loss associated with foodborne disease in low- and middle-income countries was estimated at US$ 95.2 billion per year, and the annual cost of treating foodborne illnesses is estimated at US$ 15 billion.
Safe food supplies are essential for health, contribute to food and nutrition security, support national economies, trade and tourism, and underpin sustainable development.
Urbanization and changes in consumer habits have increased the number of people buying and eating food prepared in public places. Globalization has triggered growing consumer demand for a wider variety of foods, resulting in an increasingly complex and longer global food chain.
Climate change is expected to have considerable impacts on food safety and will likely increase the risks from existing and emerging foodborne diseases through increases in extreme weather events, increases in air and water temperatures, and changes in precipitation frequency and intensity.
These challenges put greater responsibility on food producers and handlers to ensure food safety. Local incidents can quickly evolve into international emergencies due to the speed and range of product distribution.
Governments should make food safety a public health priority, as they play a pivotal role in developing evidence-based policies and risk-based, flexible regulatory frameworks and establishing and implementing effective food safety systems. Food handlers and consumers need to understand how to safely handle food and practice the WHO Five keys to safer food at home, or when selling at restaurants or at local markets. Food producers can safely grow fruits and vegetables using the WHO Five keys to growing safer fruits and vegetables.
Food safety is a shared responsibility among different national authorities and requires a multisectoral, one health approach, to be addressed in all the steps of the food chain.
WHO aims to strengthen national food control systems to facilitate global prevention, detection and response to public health threats associated with unsafe food. To do this, WHO supports Member States by:
Related
Fact sheets

========================================
fragility-fractures
========================================
Bone fractures are partial or complete breaks in a bone, which may spontaneously occur or result from a fall or a trauma . Fractures are a global public health concern and are associated with significant morbidity, mortality and healthcare costs. Due to worldwide population growth and ageing, the number of people sustaining a fracture each year has been increasing. Currently, there are no global estimates on fragility fractures, and available data include all fractures combined. According to data from the Global Burden of Disease Study, the absolute incidence, prevalence and years lived with disability for fractures have significantly increased from 1990 to 2019, with highest age-specific incidence rates in the oldest age groups (1) in which most fractures are due to bone fragility . These substantial increases have been associated with increased healthcare costs globally. In the largest five countries of the European Union plus Sweden, the annual costs of fragility fractures are expected to increase by 27% by 2030 (2). The same trend is reported in other parts of the world. Therefore, preventing fragility fractures through early assessment of risk factors and treatment of osteoporosis is essential for good health and well-being for all adults, and particularly so for older people.
Fragility fractures result from low-energy trauma , such as a fall from standing height or less. These fractures are the main clinical consequence of osteoporosis, although they may occur in postmenopausal women even in the absence of osteoporosis. The most common sites of fragility fractures are the:
Other fragility fracture sites include the pelvis, ribs, and proximal tibia. Hip and vertebral fractures are considered the most serious fragility fractures.
Risk factors are lifestyle, genetic, social or environmental factors that increase an individual’s risk or propensity of developing a disease or sustaining a health-related problem and are generally categorized into modifiable and non-modifiable factors. Modifiable risk factors can be changed by modifying one’s lifestyle or environment, so that the probability of occurrence of a disease or a health condition may be reduced. Modifiable risk factors for fragility fractures include:
Non-modifiable risk factors include:
Although non-modifiable risk factors cannot be altered by lifestyle or environmental changes, knowledge of these factors is fundamental for health workers and patients for optimal prevention strategies. In fact, as with many age-related conditions, fragility fractures can result from multiple causes and risk factors.
Osteoporosis is a disease characterized by low bone density and microarchitectural deterioration of bone tissue with a consequent increase in bone fragility and susceptibility to fracture. Aside from the factors listed above, osteoporosis itself is a risk factor for fracture the same way hypertension is for stroke, for example. Many tools have been developed to predict the probability of a fracture, most of which use combinations of clinical risk factors , with or without bone mineral density measurement. These tools are used to calculate the individuals’ risk of fracture over a certain number of years , which supports the clinical decision-making process. However, there is no global consensus on which fracture risk assessment tools have the best prediction performance. WHO is currently assessing all available fracture risk prediction tools to determine which tools could be recommended for use globally. Primary prevention refers to actions, strategies or interventions for preventing or avoiding the initial occurrence of diseases or health conditions. These include actions to identify risk factors in individuals or populations, and actions to mitigate or eliminate these risk factors. Primary prevention strategies for fragility fractures mainly aim at promoting or maintaining bone density and strength. These include:
Whereas there is some consensus on basic principles for primary prevention of fragility fractures , controversies still exist over the effectiveness of some specific interventions, as well as treatment duration. WHO has initiated a reassessment of the effectiveness and safety of key interventions for fracture prevention in adults, based on systematic reviews of available evidence. Early detection of fragility fractures and treatment is fundamental, as delayed treatment may lead to complications and compromise optimal treatment outcomes. In fact, although they are common in postmenopausal women and older men, most vertebral fractures are undiagnosed. Management of clinical fragility fractures and of complications secondary to fractures is also key. Treatment of fragility fractures can be surgical or non-surgical, with orthopaedic surgeons playing a central role. Prevention of refracture is also essential, and counts as tertiary prevention strategies, which include effective rehabilitation and improvement of quality of life. Timely rehabilitation provided by a skilled rehabilitation workforce following treatment is crucial to support people to recover from the fracture and related functioning loss. Ensuring access to assistive products and providing associated training is a crucial component of rehabilitation. Comorbidities are diseases or conditions that coexist with a specific disease or condition of interest. Besides well-established risk factors for fragility fractures, several concomitant conditions have been reported, including diabetes, hypertension, cardiovascular diseases, kidney disease, liver disease, depression, dementia and HIV infection. The presence of comorbidities has been reported as increasing the risk of negative post-fracture health outcomes and impairing functional outcomes after fracture surgery. It is therefore important to identify comorbidities in people at risk of fragility fractures or in those who sustained a fragility fracture to take adequate co-management strategies to prevent potential surgery-related complications, improve treatment outcome, and ensure good post-fracture prognosis.
WHO’s definition of universal health coverage includes rehabilitation as an essential health service, and as such, rehabilitation is a critical part of care for people with fragility fractures. The WHO Package of interventions for rehabilitation provides information on essential interventions, and human and material resources for 20 health conditions, including fractures.
The United Nations Decade of Healthy Ageing is a global collaboration to improve the lives of older people, their families, and the communities in which they live, with implementation led by WHO in collaboration with other UN agencies. In the framework of the decade’s areas for action, the WHO Integrated Care for Older People approach provides specific recommendations to prevent, slow or reverse declines in intrinsic capacity of older people, including recommendations for those at risk of falls.
In 2023, as part of the UN Decade of Healthy Ageing, WHO launched a new Bone Health and Ageing initiative. This initiative is led by the WHO Department of Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health and Ageing. The primary goals of the initiative are to develop a strategic roadmap for optimizing bone health to promote healthy ageing and to advocate for a public health strategy to prevent fractures among older people.
To follow the progress of the WHO Bone Health and Ageing initiative, please subscribe here to the newsletter.
References
Related
WHO's work on ageing
WHO's work on rehabilitation
Step safely: strategies for preventing and managing falls across the life-course
WHO guidelines on physical activity and sedentary behaviour
News
Fact sheets
More
WHO Bone Health and Ageing Initiative Newsletter For more information about the WHO’s work on Bone Health and Ageing, and on fracture prevention, please contact: BoneHealth@who.int WHO Bone Health and Ageing Initiative Newsletter For more information about the WHO’s work on Bone Health and Ageing, and on fracture prevention, please contact: BoneHealth@who.int

========================================
free-health-care-policies
========================================
Free health care policies – or politiques de gratuité – are about removing formal user fees. The removal of fees may apply to all health services, to the primary care level, to selected population groups, to selected services for everyone, or to selected services for specific population groups characterized by medical or economic vulnerability. Evidence about the impact of FHC policies in terms of financial protection and health service utilization is mixed. If well-designed and implemented, FHC policies can expand coverage in countries with few resources and can therefore be part of a strategy and a catalyst to move towards universal health coverage .
Free health care policies aim to reduce the financial barriers that people may experience when trying to access health services. They eliminate formal user fees at the point of service.
Examples of services under a free health care policy include:
antenatal care
assisted deliveries
caesarean sections
health services for children below a defined age health services for elderly people above a certain age . These services are chosen to protect population groups deemed to be especially vulnerable, particularly low-income groups. Defined geographical areas or easy-to-observe socio-demographic criteria such as age, sex or pregnancy are used to determine whether a person is eligible for free health services at the point of use. This is in contrast to relying on income or another means of assessment to determine whether an individual is entitled to exemption from user fees. With limited budget resources to fund FHC as a way to make progress towards UHC, there are inevitable trade-offs, which lead to decisions about prioritizing particular services or population groups over others. When introducing a FHC policy, a government explicitly intends to make progress towards UHC in two ways: increasing service utilization for specific services, in line with people’s health needs
improving financial protection.
FHC policies also aim to enhance the quality of the health services guaranteed through this policy. Transparency and accountability are important aspects, as eligible people need to know if the policy applies to them. While FHC policies may trigger an increase in the use of services, evidence on improved financial protection is mixed. People may still have to make direct payments for other services they need. Moreover, if not properly anticipated and backed by increased supplies and medicines, FHC may have negative unintended consequences, such as patients having to pay for this scarce supply informally or in the private sector. Also, if user fees previously retained at the facility level are abolished, their effect as a direct incentive for health workers disappears, possibly leading to demotivated staff. Overall, the impacts of FHC policies have so far been mixed, especially for poor people, who may not benefit at all, or benefit to a lesser extent compared with better-off people. There are differences across and within countries, but overall, public funding tends to benefit better-off populations. Various aspects on the supply and demand sides may cause this trend in public funding. On the supply side, availability of health services is better in wealthier areas. On the demand-side, barriers can be financial and non-financial, such as limited geographical access to facilities or cultural and language barriers. Finally, setting up separate funding and remuneration mechanisms for FHC policies may contribute to fragmenting the health financing system. When there are several FHC policies in place for a variety of services, they may create disincentives to enrol in health insurance schemes with more comprehensive benefit packages. Preparatory and complementary measures are needed for free health care policies to be successful.
Sufficient financial resources need to be provided to the facility level to compensate for both the loss of revenue at the provider level and the desired increase in use of services.
Provider payment methods and effective allocation channels must be in place before a FHC policy comes into effect. This is also critical to incentivize health workers.
Diagnosing and addressing the factors that prevent the poor from using priority health services are all critical to ensuring FHC policies benefit the most vulnerable. Health services must be made available to the most distant and vulnerable population groups. A related measure is to increase the autonomy of health service providers.
Policy makers need to look for synergies and ensure that FHC policies lead towards a coherent health financing architecture. FHC policies for specific services or population groups may not benefit the poor as much as a targeted fee exemption based on income assessment or means testing, but in practice a FHC policy may be more feasible to implement. Provided they are well-designed and implemented and part of a wider strategic vision, FHC policies can effective instrument for broader reforms aimed at achieving UHC. Related
'Free health care’ policies: Opportunities and risks for moving towards UHChttps://www.who.int/health_financing/documents/free-health-care-policies/en/
Community based health insurance: how can it contribute to progress towards UHC? https://www.who.int/health_financing/documents/community-based-health-insurance/en/
Subsidized health insurance coverage of people in the informal sector and vulnerable population groups: trends in institutional design in Asiahttps://www.springermedizin.de/subsidized-health-insurance-coverage-of-people-in-the-informal-s/10811390
State budget transfers to Health Insurance to expand coverage to people outside formal sector work in Latin America https://bmchealthservres.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12913-017-2004-y
State budget transfers to Health Insurance Funds for universal health coverage: institutional design patterns and challenges of covering those outside the formal sector in Eastern European high-income countrieshttps://equityhealthj.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12939-016-0295-y
Health financing country diagnostic: a foundation for national strategy development: https://www.who.int/health_financing/documents/country-diagnostic/en/
WHO global health expenditure database: http://apps.who.int/nha/database/Select/Indicators/en

========================================
gonorrhoea-(neisseria-gonorrhoeae-infection)
========================================
Gonorrhoea is a common sexually transmitted infection caused by a type of bacteria. It usually spreads through vaginal, oral or anal sex. Gonorrhoea is treatable and curable with antibiotics. Most cases of gonorrhoea can be prevented with regular and correct condom use. Gonorrhoea causes different symptoms in women and men. Women often feel no symptoms, but untreated infection can lead to infertility and problems during pregnancy. Common symptoms in men include pain or burning when urinating, discharge from the penis and sometimes pain in the testes.
Gonorrhoea can be passed from a pregnant mother to her baby.
Gonococcal infection increases the risk of getting and spreading HIV.
In 2020, WHO estimated 82.4 million new infections with N. gonorrhoeae among adults aged 15 to 49 years. Prevalence of gonorrhoea is highest among vulnerable populations such as men who have sex with men, sex workers, transgender women and adolescents and young people in high burden countries.
Gonorrhoea is treatable and can be cured with some antibiotics. However, the emergence of N. gonorrhoeae resistant to antibiotics are making treatment of gonorrhoea more and more challenging, with the risk of becoming untreatable. Rational use of antibiotics and the development of new ones are critical to decrease this eminent threat.
Gonorrhoea can cause symptoms in the genitals, anus or throat. Men and women may experience different symptoms. Symptoms usually begin 1–14 days after sexual contact with an infected person.
In men, common symptoms include
Most women with gonorrhea do not have symptoms or do not notice them. If they occur, they can include Anal infection in women and men can cause
Throat infections often have no symptoms. If symptoms occur, they can include redness, pain and sore throat.
Infants born to mothers with gonorrhoea may develop an eye infection. This causes redness, pain, soreness, ulcers and tearing. This is preventable with eye medications for newborns. Untreated N. gonorrhoeae infections can lead to complications and sequelae in women, such as pelvic inflammatory disease , ectopic pregnancy, and infertility. Complications in men are scrotal swelling, urethral stricture and infertility. Neonatal conjunctivitis if untreated may lead to blindness. In rare cases, disseminated gonococcal infection can occur and it is manifested as fever and infection in multiple organs of the body such as skin, heart, joints and meninges. Infection with gonorrhoea can cause stigma and affect personal relationships. These effects are important but often not quantifiable. Molecular tests are the gold standard for diagnosing N. gonorrhoeae which can be performed in the laboratory or at the point of care. Rapid diagnostic tests are currently under development. Gram stain microscopy is used in some laboratories. However, this method is less sensitive in women with vaginal/cervical discharge as well as for throat and anal infections.
In many primary health care settings where diagnostic capacity for detecting N. gonorrhoeae is not available, a syndromic approach for case management is recommended.
Sexual history taking and risk assessment are crucial in evaluating a service user before diagnosis. Clinical examination, speculum examination and palpation can provide important clues to clinical diagnosis. Urine samples are commonly used for diagnosing gonorrhoea, but swabs from genital and other sites can be used depending on the location of symptoms, sexual practices and medical history. Because majority of cases are without symptoms, screening strategies for populations at increased risk of gonorrhoea to prevent the spread of infection and the development of complications is recommended. Testing is usually coupled with tests for other sexually transmitted infections .
Antimicrobial sensitivity testing for N. gonorrhoeae is done in cases of clinical treatment failure to check if the pathogen is resistant to medications. WHO recommends that countries monitor their patterns of antimicrobial resistance to inform treatment recommendations.
People with gonorrhoea should be treated as soon as possible.
Gonorrhoea is treated with antibiotics called cephalosporins. These include:
People should wait 7 days after taking the medicine before having sex. They should notify their sexual partner(s) to get tested or treated. Treatments can fail due to: People with gonorrhoea should continue treatment until the infection is cured. Most cases of gonorrhoea can be prevented with consistent and correct condom use in every sexual encounter.
People with gonorrhoea should notify current and recent sexual partners to help prevent the spread of the disease.
Antibiotic eye ointment is recommended for newborns to prevent gonococcal eye infection. There are no specific vaccines for the prevention of gonorrhoea.However, studies are showing promising results with the use of a meningococcal type B vaccine that seems to offer cross-protection against gonorrhoea. WHO is monitoring vaccine trials results.
WHO has recognized gonorrhoea as a significant public health problem and has set ambitious targets to reduce the global burden through prevention, diagnosis, and treatment strategies. The Global Health Sector Strategies on HIV, viral hepatitis and STIs 2022–2030 aims to reduce the incidence of N. gonorrhoeae infection by 90% by 2030, compared to 2020 baseline. WHO is working with countries and partners to improve people-centred case management approaches, ensure appropriate treatment recommendations and effective testing and partner services strategies, support the development of new easy to use and affordable diagnostics and treatment, vaccine development and improve surveillance.
WHO also works with countries and partners to improve antimicrobial resistance stewardship through the Enhanced Gonorrhoea Antimicrobial Surveillance Program , which includes the implementation and use of better surveillance systems to detect antimicrobial resistance in N. gonorrhoeae and to inform locally appropriate treatment.
Related
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Sexually transmitted infections
News
Fact sheets
More
Enhanced Gonococcal Antimicrobial Surveillance Programme : general protocol Enhanced Gonococcal Antimicrobial Surveillance Programme : supplementary protocols Enhanced Gonococcal Antimicrobial Surveillance Programme : surveillance report 2022
Enhanced Gonococcal Antimicrobial Surveillance Programme : general protocol Enhanced Gonococcal Antimicrobial Surveillance Programme : supplementary protocols Enhanced Gonococcal Antimicrobial Surveillance Programme : surveillance report 2022

========================================
gambling
========================================
Gambling is risking money on an event of uncertain outcome, with the possibility of gaining an increased return. Betting, slot machines, casino games, lotteries and bingo are all forms of gambling. Electronic gambling machines and casino games are often associated with the most risk of harm. These are available both in physical venues and online. The legal status of gambling varies within and between countries, although many jurisdictions have now legalized gambling. As it is available online, it is accessible almost anywhere, at any time, even in places where gambling is prohibited.>
Gambling can lead to serious harms to health. These include financial stress, relationship breakdown, family violence, mental illness and suicide. The legacy of gambling harm can endure throughout one’s life and transmit intergenerationally. Population-wide interventions can help prevent and reduce harm. These include ending advertising and promotions, providing centralized account registration to require those who gamble to set binding loss limits, and restrictions relating to access and availability . Strict regulation and enforcement are also required to ensure compliance with existing laws. Gambling is now legally available in many countries. It has been normalized through new commercial associations with sport and cultural activities that are now heavily promoted. Around 5.5% of women and 11.9% of men globally experience some level of harm from gambling (3). A Swedish study estimated that those with a gambling disorder were 15 times more likely to die by suicide than the general population (4). In Victoria Australia, at least 4.2% of suicides were found to be gambling-related (5).
For every person who gambles at high-risk levels, an average of six others are affected (6). This number is likely much higher in kinship cultures, including among Indigenous peoples. Gambling may also divert normal consumption expenditure from other businesses.
Industry self-regulation is a common feature of gambling regulation. However, there are many examples of the failure of this approach. There is often little transparency about the way many gambling products function. EGMs can mislead users with design features that encourage extended use. Existing health promotion messages are often inadequate and can use so-called dark nudges, which encourage the consumption of harmful products and may enhance normalization. Alongside strong regulation of gambling products and their availability, clear warning messages about harms associated with use are likely to be more effective than messages suggestions to simply stop when gambling is no longer fun, for instance. There is no global agreement on the regulation of online gambling. Unlicensed providers regularly offer unregulated gambling products, and there is an urgent need for the regulation of online gambling. People experiencing significant life events including separation, retirement, injury or the death of a loved one may be at increased risk. Social stressors such as poverty, discrimination or other disadvantage also increase risks. Heavy promotion of gambling online and through sport also poses risks of normalizing gambling for children and young people.
Gambling disorder is described alongside substance use disorders in both the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fifth edition , and the International Classification of Diseases, eleventh revision . The ICD-11 describes three diagnostic requirements:
1) impaired control over gambling; 2) increasing priority given to gambling, taking precedence over other life interests and daily activities; and 3) continuation of gambling despite negative consequences.
Gambling harm also occurs well below clinical thresholds. Signs of harm include the diversion of money from essential household spending. This can lead to food insecurity, housing problems and difficulties accessing healthcare and education.
Easy accessibility of gambling products increases the risk of uptake. Opportunities to gamble are often disproportionately located in areas of higher disadvantage. High-intensity products including EGMs, high-speed wagering platforms, and casino games, including online versions, are readily accessible almost anywhere. The commercialization of gambling in many countries – which also drives normalization – is increasing the incidence of gambling harm. Sponsorship or other association with popular sporting leagues, and the colocation of gambling products in social settings, are key mechanisms. Aggressive promotion of gambling in popular and social media also increases gambling activity. Universal, population-wide public health approaches are required to prevent gambling harm. These include:
A range of therapies exist for those with gambling disorder. Currently, the most effective are long-term cognitive behavioural therapy or motivational interviewing. Self-help, pharmacological interventions and mutual support have less evidence of efficacy, although the latter are among the most used interventions. Some evidence supports internet-based therapies, although attrition is a significant issue. Treatment for gambling disorder has a low rate of uptake, with an estimated 0.14% of the population seeking formal and informal help for current problems. Stigma and shame often prevent people from seeking help. The preferred regulatory approach of the gambling industry – so-called responsible gambling – adds to this burden by effectively blaming those who experience harm. Responsible gambling interventions are typically ineffective, particularly where the uptake of measures is optional.
Those seeking to better control or cease gambling should be provided with tools to support them. These include universal pre-commitment and self-exclusion . Universal systems are most effective. Voluntary systems have poor uptake and are non-enforceable. Prevention is the most cost-effective strategy for minimizing gambling-related harm.
In countries where gambling has been legalized, governments typically receive substantial taxation revenues. This can create some dependence, creating disincentives to reduce harm. Perceived economic benefits of gambling markets may have precedence over poorly understood effects on health and well-being.
Gambling industry groups typically strongly oppose high-impact regulations and other measures that affect their commercial interests. Corporate political activity is widespread and effective in protecting the interests of these businesses. The research sector has also been influenced by industry using funding and other support. Limiting the capacity of vested interests to influence the research agenda and public policies are among the key public health objectives.
Gambling harm increases as gambling markets expand, challenging the health and well-being of populations. Unlicensed, illegal or offshore gambling poses significant regulatory challenges for all governments. Responding effectively requires intergovernmental cooperation to share data, protect consumers from unregulated practices and allow governments to capture lawful taxation revenue. Without effective protections, gambling may undermine progress toward the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals , particularly 3, 10 and 16. WHO recognizes negative effects of gambling on health. Multisectoral action to reduce gambling harm is required to reduce the potential for gambling to impede progress on SDGs. WHO acknowledges the need for Member States to closely monitor and effectively regulate gambling operations, products and activities. This should include reducing stigma and shame related to gambling, ending advertising and promotion, and a focus on other upstream efforts to prevent and reduce gambling harm.
WHO is coordinating a group of global experts to build capacity to address public health implications of gambling. Initial efforts include leading the development of new diagnostic instruments for gambling disorder to better reflect populations outside North America and facilitating an expert consensus on diagnostic boundaries. WHO recognizes that some jurisdictions have developed effective gambling regulatory systems. Efforts to document and distribute these lessons are underway, particularly to support low- and middle-income countries where commercial gambling activity is rapidly increasing.
References
Related
WHO's work on addictive behaviours News
Fact sheets

========================================
guillain-barr%C3%A9-syndrome
========================================
In Guillain-Barré syndrome, the body's immune system attacks part of the peripheral nervous system. The syndrome can affect the nerves that control muscle movement as well as those that transmit pain, temperature and touch sensations. This can result in muscle weakness, loss of sensation in the legs and/or arms, and problems swallowing or breathing. It is a rare condition, and while it is more common in adults and in males, people of all ages can be affected.
Symptoms typically last a few weeks, with most individuals recovering without long-term, severe neurological complications.
The first symptoms of Guillain-Barré syndrome include weakness or tingling sensations. They usually start in the legs and can spread to the arms and face.
For some people, these symptoms can lead to paralysis of the legs, arms, or muscles in the face. In approximately one third of people, the chest muscles are affected, making it hard to breathe.
The ability to speak and swallow may become affected in severe cases of Guillain-Barré syndrome. These cases are considered life-threatening, and affected individuals should be treated in intensive-care units.
Most people recover fully from even the most severe cases of Guillain-Barré syndrome, although some continue to experience weakness.
Even in the best of settings, a small number of Guillain-Barré syndrome patients die from complications, which can include paralysis of the muscles that control breathing, blood infection, lung clots, or cardiac arrest.
Guillain-Barré syndrome is rare. The cause of it is not fully understood, but most cases follow an infection with a virus or bacteria. This leads the immune system to attack the body itself. Infection with the bacteria Campylobacter jejuni, which causes gastroenteritis , is one of the most common risk factors for GBS. People can also develop GBS after having the flu or other viral infections including cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, and the Zika virus.
In rare instances, vaccinations may increase the risk of people getting GBS, but the chance of this occurring is extremely low. Studies show that people are much more likely to get GBS from infections such as the flu than from the vaccine given to prevent the infection, in this case the flu vaccine. Occasionally, surgery can trigger GBS.
Diagnosis is based on symptoms and findings on neurological examination including diminished or loss of deep-tendon reflexes. A lumbar puncture or Electromyography may be done for supportive information, though should not delay treatment. Other tests, such as blood tests, to identify the underlying trigger are not required to make the diagnosis of GBS and should not delay treatment. Anyone who is considered to possibly have GBS should be closely monitored for respiratory difficulty. The following are recommendations for treatment and care of people with Guillain-Barré syndrome:
WHO is supporting countries to manage GBS by:
WHO’s Intersectoral global action plan on epilepsy and other neurological disorders aims to address the challenges and gaps in providing care and services for people with neurological conditions such as GBS and ensure a comprehensive, coordinated response across sectors.
Documents

========================================
health-literacy
========================================
Health literacy means being able to access, understand, appraise and use information and services in ways that promote and maintain good health and well-being. Health literacy means more than being able to access web sites, read pamphlets and follow prescribed health-seeking behaviours. It includes the ability to think critically about, as well as the ability to interact and express personal and societal needs for promoting health.
WHO defines health literacy as “representing the personal knowledge and competencies that accumulate through daily activities, social interactions and across generations. Personal knowledge and competencies are mediated by the organizational structures and availability of resources that enable people to access, understand, appraise, and use information and services in ways that promote and maintain good health and well-being for themselves and those around them.” Health literacy requires inclusive and equitable access to quality education and life-long learning. Health literacy is shaped by a wide range of societal factors and is, therefore, not the sole responsibility of individuals to develop and maintain. All information providers, including government, civil society and health services should enable access to trustworthy information in a form that is understandable and actionable for all people. These social resources for health literacy include regulation of the information environment and media in which people obtain access to and use health information.
By improving people’s access to understandable and trustworthy health information and their capacity to use it effectively, health literacy is critical to both empowering people to make decisions about personal health, and in enabling their engagement in collective health promotion action to address the determinants of health.
Improving health literacy in populations provides the foundation on which citizens are enabled to:
Meeting the health literacy needs of the most disadvantaged and marginalized societies can accelerate progress in reducing inequities in health and beyond. Efforts to raise health literacy will be crucial in achieving 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. It is critical to transforming health systems to provide quality, people-centred, and equitable care.
Health literacy is associated with age, gender, educational attainment, income and occupation, poverty, racial/ethnic minority status, literacy and language skills, health insurance coverage, and self-reported health. Differences exist within and across population groups and settings. These differences, fuelled by disparities, can impact whether people can easily develop and use health literacy, and whether they have access to quality and trustworthy information and services. It is important to consider these disparities when developing health policies and allocating resources. Even people who read well and are comfortable using numbers can face health literacy issues when:
This makes health literacy an important determinant of health and health behaviour. At the same time, new determinants of health have emerged and threaten to widen the inequity gap. Among these are, for example, the digital determinants of health and the commercial determinants of health.
Strategies and interventions are recommended that increase both organizational and personal health literacy.
WHO promotes and improves health literacy by providing technical support and guidance to Members States to ensure effective management and promotion of health literacy at personal, organizational and systemic levels. To achieve this, WHO supports Members States to improve their reporting systems to accurately assess the extent of limited health literacy, including adapting global measurement instruments, and provides training for capacity building to promote health literacy. Reporting systems enable the creation of population data, and this evidence can be used to inform decisions at all levels, including for individuals, populations, capacity building of professionals, and systems. It also allows the collection of evidence on changes and enables responses to changing needs and circumstances. These efforts ensure that health literacy initiatives are robust, comprehensive, and tailored to meet the needs of populations worldwide. As a result, individuals and communities can make more informed decisions, organizations can better support individual and community health needs, and health care systems are strengthened, ultimately fostering better health outcomes and equity.
References
Related

========================================
health-care-waste
========================================
Health-care activities protect and restore health and save lives. But what about the waste and by-products they generate?
Of the total amount of waste generated by health-care activities, about 85% is general, non-hazardous waste comparable to domestic waste. The remaining 15% is considered hazardous material that may be infectious, chemical or radioactive. Measures to ensure the safe and environmentally sound management of health care wastes can prevent adverse health and environmental impacts from such waste including the unintended release of chemical or biological hazards.
Waste and by-products cover a diverse range of materials, including:
The major sources of health-care waste are:
High-income countries generate on average up to 0.5 kg of hazardous waste per hospital bed per day, while low-income countries generate on average 0.2 kg. However, health-care waste is often not separated into hazardous or non-hazardous wastes in low-income countries making the real quantity of hazardous waste much higher.
Health-care waste contains potentially harmful microorganisms that can infect hospital patients, health workers and the public. Other potential hazards may include drug-resistant microorganisms which spread from health facilities into the environment.
Adverse health outcomes associated with health care waste and by-products also include:
Worldwide, an estimated 16 billion injections are administered every year. Not all needles and syringes are disposed of safely, creating a risk of injury and infection and opportunities for reuse.
Injections with contaminated needles and syringes in low- and middle-income countries have reduced substantially in recent years, partly due to efforts to reduce reuse of injection devices. Despite this progress, in 2010, unsafe injections were still responsible for as many as 33 800 new HIV infections, 1.7 million hepatitis B infections and 315 000 hepatitis C infections (1).
A person who experiences one needle stick injury from a needle used on an infected source patient has risks of 30%, 1.8%, and 0.3% respectively of becoming infected with HBV, HCV and HIV.
Additional hazards occur from scavenging at waste disposal sites and during the handling and manual sorting of hazardous waste from health-care facilities. These practices are common in many regions of the world, especially in low- and middle-income countries. The waste handlers are at immediate risk of needle-stick injuries and exposure to toxic or infectious materials.
According to WHO/UNICEF, in 2021, only 61% of hospitals had basic health-care waste services. The situation is far worse in fragile contexts, where based on 2023 data, only 25% of health facilities had basic health care waste management services (2). Treatment and disposal of health-care waste may pose health risks indirectly through the release of pathogens and toxic pollutants into the environment.
Several reasons exist for inadequate health care waste services. These include limited legal frameworks , lack of awareness about the health hazards related to health-care waste, inadequate training in proper waste management, absence of waste management and disposal systems, insufficient financial and human resources and the low priority. Many countries either do not have appropriate regulations, or do not monitor and enforce them.
The management of health-care waste requires increased attention and diligence to avoid adverse health outcomes associated with poor practice, including exposure to infectious agents and toxic substances.
Key elements in improving health-care waste management are:
Government commitment and support is needed for universal, long-term improvement, although immediate action can be taken locally.
WHO developed the first global and comprehensive guidance document, Safe management of wastes from health-care activities, now in its second edition and more recently a short guide that summarizes the key elements as well as guidance on selecting technologies
The guide addresses the regulatory framework, planning, waste minimization and recycling, handling, storage and transportation, treatment and disposal options, and training. The document is aimed at health-care facility managers, policy makers, public health professionals and waste experts. In addition, as part of monitoring Sustainable Development Goal 6 on safely managed water and sanitation, the WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme regularly publishes data and reports on safe management of health care waste in health care facilities.
Finally, WHO, UNICEF and partners are working to strengthen safe and sustainable health care waste practices through wider efforts focused on WASH, waste and electricity in health care facilities.
This work is closely linked to the work on climate resilient and environmentally sustainable health systems for which health care waste is a critical element. In particular WHO guidance on climate resilient and environmentally sustainable health care facilities provides technical recommendations on how to improve the environmentally sustainability of waste management systems while safeguarding human health.
(1) Pépin J, Abou Chakra CN, Pépin E, Nault V, Valiquette L. Evolution of the global burden of viral infections from unsafe medical injections, 2000-2010.PLoSOne. 2014 Jun 9;9(6):e99677. (2) WHO/UNICEF, 2024. Data update on WASH in health care facilities for 2023. World Health Organization, Geneva. https://washdata.org/reports
Related
News
Fact sheets
Feature stories
Commentaries

========================================
healthy-diet
========================================
Overview
Consuming a healthy diet throughout the life-course helps to prevent malnutrition in all its forms as well as a range of noncommunicable diseases and conditions. However, increased production of processed foods, rapid urbanization and changing lifestyles have led to a shift in dietary patterns. People are now consuming more foods high in energy, fats, free sugars and salt/sodium, and many people do not eat enough fruit, vegetables and other dietary fibre such as whole grains.
The exact make-up of a diversified, balanced and healthy diet will vary depending on individual characteristics , cultural context, locally available foods and dietary customs. However, the basic principles of what constitutes a healthy diet remain the same.
A healthy diet includes the following:
In the first 2 years of a child’s life, optimal nutrition fosters healthy growth and improves cognitive development. It also reduces the risk of becoming overweight or obese and developing NCDs later in life.
Advice on a healthy diet for infants and children is similar to that for adults, but the following elements are also important:
Eating at least 400 g, or five portions, of fruit and vegetables per day reduces the risk of NCDs (2) and helps to ensure an adequate daily intake of dietary fibre.
Fruit and vegetable intake can be improved by:
Reducing the amount of total fat intake to less than 30% of total energy intake helps to prevent unhealthy weight gain in the adult population . Also, the risk of developing NCDs is lowered by:
Fat intake, especially saturated fat and industrially-produced trans-fat intake, can be reduced by:
Most people consume too much sodium through salt and not enough potassium . High sodium intake and insufficient potassium intake contribute to high blood pressure, which in turn increases the risk of heart disease and stroke .
Reducing salt intake to the recommended level of less than 5 g per day could prevent 1.7 million deaths each year (12).
People are often unaware of the amount of salt they consume. In many countries, most salt comes from processed foods or from foods consumed frequently in large amounts . Salt is also added to foods during cooking or at the point of consumption .
Salt intake can be reduced by:
Some food manufacturers are reformulating recipes to reduce the sodium content of their products, and people should be encouraged to check nutrition labels to see how much sodium is in a product before purchasing or consuming it.
Potassium can mitigate the negative effects of elevated sodium consumption on blood pressure. Intake of potassium can be increased by consuming fresh fruit and vegetables.
In both adults and children, the intake of free sugars should be reduced to less than 10% of total energy intake . A reduction to less than 5% of total energy intake would provide additional health benefits (7). Consuming free sugars increases the risk of dental caries . Excess calories from foods and drinks high in free sugars also contribute to unhealthy weight gain, which can lead to overweight and obesity. Recent evidence also shows that free sugars influence blood pressure and serum lipids, and suggests that a reduction in free sugars intake reduces risk factors for cardiovascular diseases (13).
Sugars intake can be reduced by:
Diet evolves over time, being influenced by many social and economic factors that interact in a complex manner to shape individual dietary patterns. These factors include income, food prices , individual preferences and beliefs, cultural traditions, and geographical and environmental aspects . Therefore, promoting a healthy food environment – including food systems that promote a diversified, balanced and healthy diet – requires the involvement of multiple sectors and stakeholders, including government, and the public and private sectors.
Governments have a central role in creating a healthy food environment that enables people to adopt and maintain healthy dietary practices. Effective actions by policy-makers to create a healthy food environment include the following:
The “WHO Global Strategy on Diet, Physical Activity and Health” (14) was adopted in 2004 by the Health Assembly. The strategy called on governments, WHO, international partners, the private sector and civil society to take action at global, regional and local levels to support healthy diets and physical activity.
In 2010, the Health Assembly endorsed a set of recommendations on the marketing of foods and non-alcoholic beverages to children (15). These recommendations guide countries in designing new policies and improving existing ones to reduce the impact on children of the marketing of foods and non-alcoholic beverages to children. WHO has also developed region-specific tools that countries can use to implement the marketing recommendations.
In 2012, the Health Assembly adopted a “Comprehensive Implementation Plan on Maternal, Infant and Young Child Nutrition” and six global nutrition targets to be achieved by 2025, including the reduction of stunting, wasting and overweight in children, the improvement of breastfeeding, and the reduction of anaemia and low birthweight (9).
In 2013, the Health Assembly agreed to nine global voluntary targets for the prevention and control of NCDs. These targets include a halt to the rise in diabetes and obesity, and a 30% relative reduction in the intake of salt by 2025. The “Global Action Plan for the Prevention and Control of Noncommunicable Diseases 2013–2020” (10) provides guidance and policy options for Member States, WHO and other United Nations agencies to achieve the targets.
With many countries now seeing a rapid rise in obesity among infants and children, in May 2014 WHO set up the Commission on Ending Childhood Obesity. In 2016, the Commission proposed a set of recommendations to successfully tackle childhood and adolescent obesity in different contexts around the world (16). In November 2014, WHO organized, jointly with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations , the Second International Conference on Nutrition . ICN2 adopted the Rome Declaration on Nutrition (17), and the Framework for Action (18) which recommends a set of policy options and strategies to promote diversified, safe and healthy diets at all stages of life. WHO is helping countries to implement the commitments made at ICN2.
In May 2018, the Health Assembly approved the 13th General Programme of Work , which will guide the work of WHO in 2019–2023 (19). Reduction of salt/sodium intake and elimination of industrially-produced trans-fats from the food supply are identified in GPW13 as part of WHO’s priority actions to achieve the aims of ensuring healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages. To support Member States in taking necessary actions to eliminate industrially-produced trans-fats, WHO has developed a roadmap for countries to help accelerate actions (6). References
(1) Hooper L, Abdelhamid A, Bunn D, Brown T, Summerbell CD, Skeaff CM. Effects of total fat intake on body weight. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015; (8):CD011834.
(2) Diet, nutrition and the prevention of chronic diseases: report of a Joint WHO/FAO Expert Consultation. WHO Technical Report Series, No. 916. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2003.
(3) Fats and fatty acids in human nutrition: report of an expert consultation. FAO Food and Nutrition Paper 91. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations; 2010.
(4) Nishida C, Uauy R. WHO scientific update on health consequences of trans fatty acids: introduction. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2009; 63 Suppl 2:S1–4.
(5) Guidelines: Saturated fatty acid and trans-fatty acid intake for adults and children. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2018 . (6) REPLACE: An action package to eliminate industrially-produced trans-fatty acids. WHO/NMH/NHD/18.4. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2018.
(7) Guideline: Sugars intake for adults and children. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2015.
(8) Guideline: Sodium intake for adults and children. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2012.
(9) Comprehensive implementation plan on maternal, infant and young child nutrition. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2014.
(10) Global action plan for the prevention and control of NCDs 2013–2020. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2013.
(11) Guideline: Potassium intake for adults and children. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2012.
(12) Mozaffarian D, Fahimi S, Singh GM, Micha R, Khatibzadeh S, Engell RE et al. Global sodium consumption and death from cardiovascular causes. N Engl J Med. 2014; 371(7):624–34.
(13) Te Morenga LA, Howatson A, Jones RM, Mann J. Dietary sugars and cardiometabolic risk: systematic review and meta-analyses of randomized controlled trials of the effects on blood pressure and lipids. AJCN. 2014; 100(1): 65–79.
(14) Global strategy on diet, physical activity and health. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2004.
(15) Set of recommendations on the marketing of foods and non-alcoholic beverages to children. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2010.
(16) Report of the Commission on Ending Childhood Obesity. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2016.
(17) Rome Declaration on Nutrition. Second International Conference on Nutrition. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations/World Health Organization; 2014.
(18) Framework for Action. Second International Conference on Nutrition. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations/World Health Organization; 2014.
(19) Thirteenth general programme of work, 2019–2023. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2018.
Related
News
Fact sheets
More
Comprehensive implementation plan on maternal, infant and young child nutritionWHO Recommendations on the marketing of foods and non-alcoholic beverages to childrenGlobal Action Plan for the Prevention and Control of NCDsGuideline: sodium intake for adults and childrenGuideline: potassium intake for adults and childrenPreparation and use of food-based dietary guidelines

========================================
climate-change-heat-and-health
========================================
A heatwave is a period where local excess heat accumulates over a sequence of unusually hot days and nights. Heatwaves and prolonged excess heat conditions are increasing in frequency, duration, intensity and magnitude due to climate change. Even low and moderate intensity heat waves can impact the health and well-being of vulnerable populations. The frequency and intensity of extreme heat and heat waves will continue to rise in the 21st century because of climate change. Extended periods of high day and nighttime temperature conditions create cumulative stress on the human body, increasing the risk of illness and death from heat exposure. Heatwaves can acutely impact large populations for short periods of time, often trigger public health emergencies, and result in excess mortality and cascading socioeconomic impacts . They can also cause loss of health service delivery capacity, when power shortages accompany heatwaves and disrupt health facilities, transport and water infrastructure.
Population ageing and the growing prevalence of non-communicable diseases (respiratory and cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, dementia, renal disease and musculoskeletal disease) means that populations are becoming more susceptible to negative heat impacts. Cities are not being designed to minimize the accumulation and generation of urban heat, with a loss of greenspace and inappropriate housing materials that amplify human exposure to excess heat.
Awareness among health workers and the public remains insufficient of the health risks posed by heat. Health professionals should adjust their guidance, planning and interventions to account for increasing heat exposures, as well as to manage acute increases in admissions associated with heatwaves. Practical, feasible and often low-cost interventions at the individual, community, organizational, governmental and societal levels can save lives.
Many populations in tropical and subtropical climates are chronically exposed to high temperatures. In mid to high latitudes, population exposure excess heat is seasonal. Individual vulnerability to heat for physiological or clinical factors in adults is well described (4). Heat can affect health through a variety of direct and indirect mechanisms. There is limited research on the impact of chronic exposure to high temperatures and humidity. Outdoor and manual workers, athletes and civil protection employees are exposed to excess heat because of their work and susceptible to exertional heat stress.
Urban and rural poor are often disproportionately exposed to overheating due to low quality housing and lack of access to cooling. Due to building materials, informal settlements are often hotter than other urban areas in some cities. Gender can play an important role in determining heat exposure, for example where women are primarily responsible for cooking indoors during hot weather. Infographic: Main heat vulnerability factors
The amount of heat stored in the human body is determined by a combination of (a) an inability to eliminate internally generated heat from metabolic processes due to environmental heat stress , (b) clothing creating a barrier to heat loss, (c) external heat gain from the environment.
The body’s inability to regulate internal temperature and eliminate heat gain in such conditions increases the risk of heat exhaustion and heatstroke. The strain put on the body as it tries to cool itself also stresses the heart and kidneys. As a result, heat extremes can worsen health risks from chronic conditions and cause acute kidney injury. Deaths and hospitalizations triggered by extreme hot weather occur rapidly , which means interventions also need to be rapid when a heat alert is issued. Heat can also disrupt and compromise essential health services, such as the loss of power supply and transport. Heat will reduce working productivity and increases the risk of accidents. It is difficult to complete work or learning in very hot weather and heatwaves may lead schools and other institutions to close. Heatwaves can also be associated with hazardous air pollution events. The scale and nature of the health impacts of heat depend on the timing, intensity and duration of a heat event, and the level of acclimatization and adaptability of the local population, infrastructure and institutions to the prevailing climate.
Infographic: Scale and nature of the health impacts of heat
Download: Signs of heat stroke
Mitigating climate change by reducing greenhouse gas emissions is imperative and urgent to limit the magnitude of human costs from extreme heat. WHO is addressing climate change through the Alliance for Transformational Change in Climate and Health , as well as country support of technical and policy resources to help the health sector and communities adapt to the risks of climate change. WHO works with the health sector to strengthen governance, preparedness and response to acute impacts of heatwaves by developing heat action plans, heat early warning systems and advisories, and emergency response plans that map the risks, vulnerable populations, available capacities and resources. These plans protect high risk populations such as those in health facilities, nursing homes and schools which do not have access to cooling. WHO co-sponsors the Global Heat Health Information Network to accelerate sharing and learning about the risks and solutions to address extreme heat. WHO partners closely with the World Meteorological Organization on the development of Heat Health Warning Systems. References
Related
Fact sheets

========================================
hepatitis-a
========================================
Hepatitis A is an inflammation of the liver caused by the hepatitis A virus . The virus is primarily spread when an uninfected person ingests food or water that is contaminated with the faeces of an infected person. The disease is closely associated with unsafe water or food, inadequate sanitation, poor personal hygiene and oral-anal sex.
Unlike hepatitis B and C, hepatitis A does not cause chronic liver disease but it can cause mild to severe symptoms and rarely fulminant hepatitis , which is often fatal. WHO estimates that in 2016, 7134 persons died from hepatitis A worldwide .
Hepatitis A occurs sporadically and in epidemics worldwide, with a tendency for cyclic recurrences. Epidemics related to contaminated food or water can erupt explosively, such as the epidemic in Shanghai in 1988 that affected about 300 000 people (1). They can also be prolonged, affecting communities for months through person-to-person transmission. Hepatitis A viruses persist in the environment and can withstand food production processes routinely used to inactivate or control bacterial pathogens.
Geographical distribution areas can be characterized as having high, intermediate or low levels of hepatitis A virus infection. However, infection does not always mean disease because infected young children do not experience any noticeable symptoms.
Infection is common in low- and middle-income countries with poor sanitary conditions and hygienic practices, and most children have been infected with the hepatitis A virus before the age of 10 years, most often without symptoms (2). Infection rates are low in high-income countries with good sanitary and hygienic conditions. Disease may occur among adolescents and adults in high-risk groups, such as persons who inject drugs , men who have sex with men , people travelling to areas of high endemicity and in isolated populations, such as closed religious groups. In the United States of America, large outbreaks have been reported among persons experiencing homelessness.
The hepatitis A virus is transmitted primarily by the faecal-oral route; that is when an uninfected person ingests food or water that has been contaminated with the faeces of an infected person. In families, this may happen though dirty hands when an infected person prepares food for family members. Waterborne outbreaks, though infrequent, are usually associated with sewage-contaminated or inadequately treated water.
The virus can also be transmitted through close physical contact with an infectious person, although casual contact among people does not spread the virus.
The incubation period of hepatitis A is usually 14–28 days.
Symptoms of hepatitis A range from mild to severe and can include fever, malaise, loss of appetite, diarrhoea, nausea, abdominal discomfort, dark-coloured urine and jaundice . Not everyone who is infected will have all the symptoms.
Adults have signs and symptoms of illness more often than children. The severity of disease and fatal outcomes are higher in older age groups. Infected children under 6 years of age do not usually experience noticeable symptoms, and only 10% develop jaundice. Hepatitis A sometimes relapses, meaning the person who just recovered falls sick again with another acute episode. This is normally followed by recovery.
Anyone who has not been vaccinated or previously infected can get infected with the hepatitis A virus. In areas where the virus is widespread , most hepatitis A infections occur during early childhood. Risk factors include:
Cases of hepatitis A are not clinically distinguishable from other types of acute viral hepatitis. Specific diagnosis is made by the detection of HAV-specific immunoglobulin G antibodies in the blood. Additional tests include reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction to detect the hepatitis A virus RNA and may require specialized laboratory facilities. PCR can detect the presence of HAV infection early in the infection, even before the patient develops antibodies . This is particularly useful for diagnosing hepatitis A in the early stages. PCR can additionally help to monitor the progression of the infection and the resolution of infection.
There is no specific antiviral treatment for hepatitis A. Instead, the management of hepatitis A focuses on supportive care to relieve symptoms and ensure adequate hydration and nutrition. Recovery from symptoms following infection may be slow and can take several weeks or months. It is important to avoid unnecessary medications that can adversely affect the liver, e.g. acetaminophen, paracetamol.
Hospitalization is unnecessary in the absence of severe disease or acute liver failure. Therapy is aimed at maintaining comfort and adequate nutritional balance, including replacement of fluids that are lost from vomiting and diarrhoea.
Improved sanitation, food safety, safer sex practices and immunization are the most effective ways to combat hepatitis A.
The spread of hepatitis A can be reduced by:
Several injectable inactivated hepatitis A vaccines are available internationally. All provide similar protection from the virus and have comparable side effects. No vaccine is licensed for children younger than 1 year of age. In China, a live attenuated vaccine is also available.
Rapid detection and verification of health emergencies is essential to save lives. WHO’s global surveillance system picks up public health threats 24 hours a day, 365 days a year. HAV outbreaks are regularly notified to WHO and the organization provides a coordinated 3-level response in support of its members states if necessary. Global health sector strategies on, respectively, HIV, viral hepatitis, and sexually transmitted infections for the period 2022–2030 guide the health sector in implementing strategically focused responses to achieve the goals of ending AIDS, viral hepatitis and sexually transmitted infections by 2030.
The GHSS recommend shared and disease-specific country actions supported by actions by WHO and partners. They consider the epidemiological, technological, and contextual shifts of previous years, foster learnings across the disease areas, and create opportunities to leverage innovations and new knowledge for effective responses to the diseases. They call to scale up prevention, testing and treatment of viral hepatitis with a focus to reach populations and communities most affected and at risk for each disease, as well as addressing gaps and inequities. They promote synergies under a universal health coverage and primary health care framework and contribute to achieving the goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
WHO organizes annual World Hepatitis Day campaigns to increase awareness and understanding of viral hepatitis. For World Hepatitis Day 2024, WHO focuses on the theme “It’s time for action” to illustrate the urgency of scaling up viral hepatitis prevention, testing and treatment to prevent liver diseases and cancer and achieve the 2030 hepatitis elimination target.
Related
Global hepatitis report, 2024
World Hepatitis Day
Global health sector strategy on viral hepatitis
News
Fact sheets
Events
More PublicationsFinancing prevention, testing and treatment of hepatitis in the context of Universal Health CoverageGuidelines for viral hepatitis planning and tracking progress towards eliminationImmunological basis for immunization: hepatitis AThe global prevalence of hepatitis A virus infection and susceptibility WHO position paper on hepatitis A vaccinesMore WHO publications More about hepatitisWHO's work on hepatitisGlobal Hepatitis Programme Publications
More about hepatitis

========================================
hepatitis-b
========================================
Hepatitis B is an infection of the liver caused by the hepatitis B virus. The infection can be acute or chronic .
Hepatitis B can cause a chronic infection and puts people at high risk of death from cirrhosis and liver cancer.
It can spread through contact with infected body fluids like blood, saliva, vaginal fluids and semen. It can also be passed from a mother to her baby.
Hepatitis B can be prevented with a safe and effective vaccine. The vaccine is usually given soon after birth with boosters a few weeks later. It offers nearly 100% protection against the virus.
Hepatitis B is a major global health problem. The burden of infection is highest in the WHO Western Pacific Region and the WHO African Region, where 97 million and 65 million people, respectively, are chronically infected. Sixty-one million people are infected in the WHO South-East Asia Region, 15 million in the WHO Eastern Mediterranean Region, 11 million in the WHO in the WHO European Region and 5 million in the WHO Region of the Americas.
In highly endemic areas, hepatitis B is most commonly spread from mother to child at birth or through horizontal transmission , especially from an infected child to an uninfected child during the first 5 years of life. The development of chronic infection is common in infants infected from their mothers or before the age of 5 years.
Hepatitis B is also spread by needlestick injury, tattooing, piercing and exposure to infected blood and body fluids, such as saliva and menstrual, vaginal and seminal fluids. Transmission of the virus may also occur through the reuse of contaminated needles and syringes or sharp objects either in health care settings, in the community or among persons who inject drugs. Sexual transmission is more prevalent in unvaccinated persons with multiple sexual partners.
Hepatitis B infection acquired in adulthood leads to chronic hepatitis in less than 5% of cases, whereas infection in infancy and early childhood leads to chronic hepatitis in about 95% of cases. This is the basis for strengthening and prioritizing infant and childhood vaccination.
The hepatitis B virus can survive outside the body for at least 7 days. During this time, the virus can still cause infection if it enters the body of a person who is not protected by the vaccine. The incubation period of the hepatitis B virus ranges from 30 to 180 days. The virus may be detected within 30 to 60 days after infection and can persist and develop into chronic hepatitis B, especially when transmitted in infancy or childhood.
Most people do not experience any symptoms when newly infected. Some people have acute illness with symptoms that last several weeks:
When severe, acute hepatitis can lead to liver failure, which can lead to death.
Although most people will recover from acute illness, some people with chronic hepatitis B will develop progressive liver disease and complications like cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma . These diseases can be fatal. About 1% of persons living with HBV infection are also infected with HIV. Conversely, the global prevalence of HBV infection in HIV-infected persons is 7.4%. Since 2015, WHO has recommended treatment for everyone diagnosed with HIV infection, regardless of the stage of disease. Tenofovir, which is included in the treatment combinations recommended as first-line therapy for HIV infection, is also active against HBV.
It is not possible on clinical grounds to differentiate hepatitis B from hepatitis caused by other viral agents; hence laboratory confirmation of the diagnosis is essential. Several blood tests are available to diagnose and monitor people with hepatitis B. Some laboratory tests can be used to distinguish acute and chronic infections, whilst other can assess and monitor the severity of liver disease. Physical examination, ultrasound, fibroscan can also be performed to assess degree of liver fibrosis and scarring and monitor progression of liver disease. WHO recommends that all blood donations be tested for hepatitis B to ensure blood safety and avoid accidental transmission.
As of 2022, 13% of all people estimated to be living with hepatitis B were aware of their infection, while 3% of the people living with chronic hepatitis B were on treatment. According to latest WHO estimates, the proportion of children under five years of age chronically infected with HBV dropped to just under 1% in 2019 down from around 5% in the pre-vaccine era ranging from the 1980s to the early 2000s.
In settings with high Hepatitis B surface antigen seroprevalence in the general population , WHO recommends that all adults have access to and be offered HBsAg testing with linkage to prevention and care and treatment services as needed. WHO also recommends blood donor screening, routine testing for hepatitis B all pregnant women to provide the opportunity to institute measures for prevention of MTCT as well as focused or targeted testing of specific high-risk groups (including migrants from endemic regions, partners or family members of infected persons, and health-care workers PWID, people in prisons and other closed settings, MSM and sex workers, HIV-infected persons.
There is no specific treatment for acute hepatitis B. Chronic hepatitis B can be treated with medicines. Care for acute hepatitis B should focus on making the person comfortable. They should eat a healthy diet and drink plenty of liquids to prevent dehydration from vomiting and diarrhoea. Chronic hepatitis B infection can be treated with oral medicines, including tenofovir or entecavir. Treatment can Most people who start hepatitis B treatment must continue it for life.
With the updated Hepatitis B Guidelines, it is estimated that more than 50% of people with chronic hepatitis B infection will require treatment, depending on setting and eligibility criteria. In low-income settings, most people with liver cancer present late in the course of the disease and die within months of diagnosis. In high-income countries, patients present to hospital earlier in the course of the disease and have access to surgery and chemotherapy, which can prolong life for several months to a few years. Liver transplantation is sometimes used in people with cirrhosis or liver cancer in technologically advanced countries, with varying success.
Hepatitis B is preventable with a vaccine.
All babies should receive the hepatitis B vaccine as soon as possible after birth . This is followed by two or three doses of hepatitis B vaccine at least four weeks apart. Booster vaccines are not usually required for people who have completed the three-dose vaccination series.
The vaccine protects against hepatitis B for at least 20 years and probably for life.
Hepatitis B can be passed from mother to child. This can be prevented by taking antiviral medicines to prevent transmission, in addition to the vaccine. To reduce the risk of getting or spreading hepatitis B:
Global health sector strategies on, respectively, HIV, viral hepatitis, and sexually transmitted infections for the period 2022–2030 guide the health sector in implementing strategically focused responses to achieve the goals of ending AIDS, viral hepatitis and sexually transmitted infections by 2030.
The GHSS recommend shared and disease-specific country actions supported by actions by WHO and partners. They consider the epidemiological, technological, and contextual shifts of previous years, foster learnings across the disease areas, and create opportunities to leverage innovations and new knowledge for effective responses to the diseases. They call to scale up prevention, testing and treatment of viral hepatitis with a focus to reach populations and communities most affected and at risk for each disease, as well as addressing gaps and inequities. They promote synergies under a universal health coverage and primary health care framework and contribute to achieving the goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
WHO organizes annual World Hepatitis Day campaigns to increase awareness and understanding of viral hepatitis. For World Hepatitis Day 2023, WHO focused on the theme “One life, one liver” to illustrate the importance of the liver for a healthy life and the need to scale up viral hepatitis prevention, testing and treatment to prevent liver diseases and achieve the 2030 hepatitis elimination target.
Related
Global hepatitis report, 2024
Guidelines for the prevention, diagnosis, care and treatment for people with chronic hepatitis B infection
World Hepatitis Day
Global health sector strategy on viral hepatitis
News
Fact sheets
Events
More
Guidelines & manualsMonitoring and evaluation of hepatitis B and CManual for the development of national viral hepatitis plansMore about hepatitisWHO's work on hepatitis Global Hepatitis ProgrammeWHO position paper on hepatitis B vaccinesFurther information on hepatitis B vaccinesPublicationsWHO's publications
Guidelines & manuals
More about hepatitis
Publications

========================================
hepatitis-c
========================================
Hepatitis C is a viral infection that affects the liver. It can cause both acute and chronic illness. It can be life-threatening.
Hepatitis C is spread through contact with infected blood. This can happen through sharing needles or syringes, or from unsafe medical procedures such as blood transfusions with unscreened blood products. Symptoms can include fever, fatigue, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, dark urine and yellowing of the skin or eyes . There is no vaccine for hepatitis C, but it can be treated with antiviral medications. Early detection and treatment can prevent serious liver damage and improve long-term health.
Acute HCV infections are usually asymptomatic and most do not lead to a life-threatening disease. Around 30% of infected persons spontaneously clear the virus within 6 months of infection without any treatment.
The remaining 70% of persons will develop chronic HCV infection. Of those with chronic HCV infection, the risk of cirrhosis ranges from 15% to 30% within 20 years.
Hepatitis C virus infection occurs in all WHO regions. The highest burden of disease is in the Eastern Mediterranean Region with 12 million people chronically infected. In the South-East Asia Region , European Region and the Western Pacific Region people are chronically infected. Eight million people are chronically infected in the African Region and 5 million the Region of the Americas.
The hepatitis C virus is a bloodborne virus. It is most commonly transmitted through:
HCV can be passed from an infected mother to her baby and via sexual practices that lead to exposure to blood ; however, these modes of transmission are less common.
Hepatitis C is not spread through breast milk, food, water or casual contact such as hugging, kissing and sharing food or drinks with an infected person.
Most people do not have symptoms in the first weeks after infection. It can take between two weeks and six months to have symptoms.
When symptoms do appear, they may include:
Because new HCV infections are usually asymptomatic, few people are diagnosed when the infection is recent. In those people who develop chronic HCV infection, the infection is often undiagnosed because it remains asymptomatic until decades after infection when symptoms develop secondary to serious liver damage.
HCV infection is diagnosed in 2 steps:
After a person has been diagnosed with chronic HCV infection, an assessment should be conducted to determine the degree of liver damage . This can be done by liver biopsy or through a variety of non-invasive tests. The degree of liver damage is used to guide treatment decisions and management of the disease.
Early diagnosis can prevent health problems that may result from infection and prevent transmission of the virus. WHO recommends testing people who may be at increased risk of infection.
In settings with high HCV antibody seroprevalence in the general population , WHO also recommends blood donor screening, as well as focused or targeted testing of specific high-risk groups, including migrants from endemic regions, health-care workers, people who inject drugs , people in prisons and other closed settings, men who have sex with men , sex workers and HIV-infected persons. WHO recommends that all adults have access to and be offered HCV testing with linkage to prevention, care and treatment services.
About 2.3 million people of the estimated 39 million living with HIV globally have serological evidence of past or present HCV infection. Chronic liver disease represents a major cause of morbidity and mortality among persons living with HIV globally.
There are effective treatments for hepatitis C. The goal of treatment is to cure the disease and prevent long-term liver damage. Antiviral medications, including sofosbuvir and daclatasvir, are used to treat hepatitis C. Some people's immune system can fight the infection on their own and new infections do not always need treatment. Treatment is always needed for chronic hepatitis C. People with hepatitis C may also benefit from lifestyle changes, such as avoiding alcohol and maintaining a healthy weight. With proper treatment, many people can be cured from hepatitis C infection and live healthy lives.
WHO recommends therapy with pan-genotypic direct-acting antivirals for all adults, adolescents and children down to 3 years of age with chronic hepatitis C infection. The short-course oral, curative DAA treatment regimens has few if any side-effects. DAAs can cure most persons with HCV infection, and treatment duration is short , depending on the absence or presence of cirrhosis. In 2022, WHO included new recommendations for treatment of adolescents and children using the same pangenotypic treatments used for adults. Pan-genotypic DAAs remain expensive in many high- and upper-middle-income countries. However, prices have dropped dramatically in many countries due to the introduction of generic versions of these medicines. The most widely used and low-cost pangenotypic DAA regimen is sofosbuvir and daclatasvir. In many low- and middle-income countries the curative treatment course is available for less than US$ 50.
Access to HCV treatment is improving but remains limited. Of the 50 million people living with HCV infection globally in 2022, an estimated 36% people knew their diagnosis, and of those diagnosed with chronic HCV infection, around 20% people had been treated with DAAs by the end of 2022.
Until recently, delivery of hepatitis C testing and treatment in many countries relied on specialist-led care models in hospital settings to administer complex treatment. With the short-course oral, curative pangenotypic HCV DAA treatment regimens with few if any side-effects, minimal expertise and monitoring are now required. WHO recommends that testing, care and treatment for persons with chronic hepatitis C infection can be provided by trained non-specialist doctors and nurses, using simplified service delivery that includes decentralization, integration and task shifting. This can be done in primary care, harm reduction services and prisons which is more accessible and convenient for patients.
Testing, care and treatment can now also be provided safely in primary care, harm reduction services and prisons which is more accessible and convenient for patients.
There is no effective vaccine against hepatitis C. The best way to prevent the disease is to avoid contact with the virus.
Extra care should be used in healthcare settings and for people with a higher risk of hepatitis C virus infection.
People at higher risk include those who inject drugs, men who have sex with men, and those living with HIV.
Ways to prevent hepatitis C include:
Global health sector strategies on, respectively, HIV, viral hepatitis, and sexually transmitted infections for the period 2022–2030 guide the health sector in implementing strategically focused responses to achieve the goals of ending AIDS, viral hepatitis and sexually transmitted infections by 2030.
The GHSS recommend shared and disease-specific country actions supported by actions by WHO and partners. They consider the epidemiological, technological, and contextual shifts of previous years, foster learnings across the disease areas, and create opportunities to leverage innovations and new knowledge for effective responses to the diseases. They call to scale up prevention, testing and treatment of viral hepatitis with a focus to reach populations and communities most affected and at risk for each disease, as well as addressing gaps and inequities. They promote synergies under a universal health coverage and primary health care framework and contribute to achieving the goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
WHO organizes annual World Hepatitis Day campaigns to increase awareness and understanding of viral hepatitis. For World Hepatitis Day 2023, WHO focuses on the theme “One life, one liver” to illustrate the importance of the liver for a healthy life and the need to scale up viral hepatitis prevention, testing and treatment to prevent liver diseases and achieve the 2030 hepatitis elimination target.
Related
Global hepatitis report, 2024
World Hepatitis Day
Global health sector strategy on viral hepatitis
News
Fact sheets
Events
More
Guidelines & manualsUpdated recommendations on treatment of adolescents and children with chronic HCV infection, and HCV simplified service delivery and diagnosticsAccelerating access to hepatitis C diagnostics and treatmentRecommendations and guidance on hepatitis C virus self-testingAccess to hepatitis C testing and treatment for people who inject drugs and people in prisons: a global perspectiveMonitoring and evaluation of hepatitis B and CManual for the development of national viral hepatitis plansMore about hepatitisWHO's work on hepatitisGlobal Hepatitis Programme PublicationsUpdated recommendations on simplified service delivery and diagnostics for hepatitis C infectionUpdated recommendations on treatment of adolescents and children with chronic HCV infection
All WHO hepatitis publications
Guidelines & manuals
More about hepatitis
Publications

========================================
hepatitis-d
========================================
Hepatitis D is an inflammation of the liver caused by the hepatitis D virus , which requires hepatitis B virus for its replication. Hepatitis D infection cannot occur in the absence of HBV. HDV–HBV co-infection is considered the most severe form of chronic viral hepatitis due to more rapid progression towards hepatocellular carcinoma and liver-related death. Vaccination against hepatitis B can prevent HDV infection.
In a study published in the Journal of Hepatology in 2020 (1), conducted in collaboration with WHO, it was estimated that hepatitis D virus affects nearly 5% of people globally who have a chronic infection with hepatitis B virus and that HDV co-infection could explain about 1 in 5 cases of liver disease and liver cancer in people with HBV infection. The study has identified several geographical hotspots of high prevalence of HDV infection including Mongolia, the Republic of Moldova, and countries in western and central Africa.
HDV is blood borne and transmitted in the same way as HBV. Transmission may occur through contact with infected human blood or other bodily fluids. It may also be transmitted through sexual intercourse, or rarely from a mother to her child before or around birth . HDV can also spread within families in endemic areas. Chronic HBV carriers are at risk of infection with HDV. People who are not immune to HBV are at risk of infection with HBV, which puts them at risk of HDV infection.
Those who are more likely to have HBV and HDV co-infection include indigenous people, people who inject drugs and people with hepatitis C virus or HIV infection. The risk of HDV infection also appears to be potentially higher in recipients of haemodialysis, men who have sex with men and commercial sex workers. Vaccination against HBV can prevent HDV coinfection and hence expansion of childhood HBV immunization programmes has resulted in a decline in hepatitis D incidence worldwide.
Simultaneous infection with HBV and HDV can lead to mild-to-severe hepatitis with signs and symptoms of indistinguishable from those of other types of acute viral hepatitis infections. These features typically appear 3–7 weeks after initial infection and include fever, fatigue, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, dark urine, pale-coloured stools, jaundice and even fulminant hepatitis. However, recovery is usually complete, development of fulminant hepatitis is infrequent, and progression to chronic hepatitis D is rare .
In a superinfection, HDV can infect a person already chronically infected with HBV. The superinfection of HDV on chronic hepatitis B accelerates progression to a more severe disease in all ages and in 70‒90% of persons. HDV superinfection markedly accelerates progression to cirrhosis when compared with HBV mono-infected persons. Patients with HDV induced cirrhosis are at an increased risk of hepatocellular carcinoma ; however, the mechanism in which HDV causes more severe hepatitis and a faster progression of fibrosis than HBV alone remains unclear.
Diagnosing chronic HDV requires serology to demonstrate exposure and molecular methods to demonstrate the presence of HDV RNA and active infection. However, HDV diagnostics are not widely available – especially in low- and middle-income countries – and there is only little standardization for HDV RNA assays, which are essential to detect active, viremic infection and for monitoring response to antiviral therapy.
Until recently, pegylated interferon α had been the only treatment option for chronic HDV. However, its use has been limited by poor treatment outcomes, side-effects and contraindications. Only about 20–30% of those treated with PEG-IFNα achieve complete virological response under treatment, and relapse is frequent. The HDV treatment landscape is now rapidly evolving, with some novel agents showing favorable results. In 2023, Bulevirtide, an entry inhibitor that is given once daily through subcutaneous injection, received approval for treatment of chronic HDV by the European Medicines Agency among adults with compensated liver disease. Several multi-center studies continue to evaluate best treatment dosage, treatment duration and possible combination with PEG-IFNα. Nucleoside analogues used for hepatitis B treatment have shown no direct benefit in controlling HDV although they are generally used for managing the chronic HBV infection. Prevention services of hepatitis D should focus on reducing HBV transmission through hepatitis B immunization, including timely birth dose, additional antiviral prophylaxis for eligible pregnant women, blood safety, safe injection practices in health-care settings and harm reduction services with clean needles and syringes. Hepatitis B immunization does not provide protection against HDV for those already infected with HBV.
Global health sector strategies on, respectively, HIV, viral hepatitis, and sexually transmitted infections for the period 2022–2030 guide the health sector in implementing strategically focused responses to achieve the goals of ending AIDS, viral hepatitis and sexually transmitted infections by 2030.
The GHSS recommends shared and disease-specific country approaches supported by actions through WHO and partners. They consider the epidemiological, technological and contextual shifts of previous years, foster learnings across the disease areas, and create opportunities to leverage innovations and new knowledge for effective responses to the diseases. They call to scale up prevention, testing and treatment of viral hepatitis with a focus to reach populations and communities most affected and at risk for each disease, as well as addressing gaps and inequities. They promote synergies under a universal health coverage and primary health care framework and contribute to achieving the goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Additionally, WHO released updated Guidelines for the prevention, diagnosis, care and treatment for people with chronic hepatitis B infection in 2024. These guidelines now include formal recommendations for testing and confirmatory diagnosis of HDV. WHO is working as well to include the key HDV tests into its essential diagnostics list and is working with partners and member states to highlight the importance of a public health response to HDV. WHO organizes annual World Hepatitis Day campaigns to increase awareness and understanding of viral hepatitis. For World Hepatitis Day 2024, WHO focused on the theme “It’s time for action” to illustrate the urgency of scaling up viral hepatitis prevention, testing and treatment to prevent liver diseases and cancer and achieve the 2030 hepatitis elimination target.
Related
News
Fact sheets
Events
More
Guidelines & manualsHepatitis B treatmentMonitoring and evaluation of hepatitis B and CManual for the development of national viral hepatitis plansMore about hepatitisWHO's work on hepatitis Global Hepatitis ProgrammePublicationsWHO's publications
Guidelines & manuals
More about hepatitis
Publications

========================================
hepatitis-e
========================================
Hepatitis E is inflammation of the liver caused by the hepatitis E virus . The virus is shed in the stools of infected people and enters the human body through the oral route. It is transmitted mainly through contaminated drinking water. The infection is usually self-limiting and resolves within 2–6 weeks. A serious disease known as fulminant hepatitis occasionally develops, which can be fatal.
Hepatitis E infection is found worldwide and is common in low- and middle-income countries with limited access to essential water, sanitation, hygiene and health services. Infection can occur as outbreaks or as sporadic cases. HEV has four major genotypes that cause human disease . The genotypes have distinct routes of transmission and geographical distributions. HEV genotypes 1 and 2 primarily infect humans, whereas genotypes 3 and 4 mainly infect non-human mammals and cause occasional zoonotic disease in humans. The transmission of genotypes 3 and 4 is mainly zoonotic, through consumption of uncooked or undercooked meat, with the environment also a likely source of infection. Genotype 1 and 2, the most prevalent HEV genotypes in Africa and parts of Asia, are mainly faecal-orally transmitted. In particular contamination of drinking water often leads to large-scale outbreaks, affecting several hundred to several thousand people. Some of these outbreaks have occurred in areas of conflict and humanitarian emergencies such as war zones and camps for refugees or internally displaced populations, where sanitation and safe water supply pose special challenges. The incubation period following exposure to HEV ranges from 2 to 10 weeks, with an average of 5 to 6 weeks. The infected persons excretes the virus beginning from a few days before to 3–4 weeks after onset of the disease.
In areas with high disease endemicity, symptomatic infection is most common in young adults aged 15–40 years. In these areas, although infection does occur in children, it often goes undiagnosed because they typically have no symptoms or only a mild illness without jaundice.
Typical signs and symptoms of hepatitis include:
These symptoms may be indistinguishable from those experienced during other forms of hepatitis or other infectious diseases in endemic areas, such as leptospirosis, dengue, yellow fever and malaria. The symptoms typically last 1–6 weeks.
Although hepatitis E is commonly considered as an acute, self-limited disease, in rare cases acute hepatitis E can be severe and result in fulminant hepatitis . These patients are at risk of death. Pregnant women with hepatitis E, particularly those in the second or third trimester, are at increased risk of acute liver failure, fetal loss and mortality. Up to 20–25% of pregnant women can die if they get hepatitis E in third trimester.
Rarely, cases of chronic hepatitis E infection have as well been reported in immunosuppressed people, particularly organ transplant recipients on immunosuppressive drugs. Cases of hepatitis E are not clinically distinguishable from other types of acute viral hepatitis or potentially other infectious disease that cause jaundice. However, diagnosis can often be strongly suspected in appropriate epidemiologic settings, for example when several cases occur in localities in known disease-endemic areas, in settings with risk of water contamination when the disease is more severe in pregnant women or if hepatitis A has been excluded.
Definitive diagnosis of hepatitis E infection is usually based on the detection of specific anti-HEV immunoglobulin M antibodies to the virus in a person’s blood. Rapid tests are available for field use. Other laboratory findings include elevated serum concentrations of bilirubin, alanine aminotransferase , and aspartate aminotransferase .
Additional tests include reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction to detect the hepatitis E virus RNA in blood and stool. This assay requires specialized laboratory facilities. This test is particularly needed in areas where hepatitis E is infrequent and in uncommon cases with chronic HEV infection.
There is no specific antiviral treatment capable of altering the course of acute hepatitis E. As the disease is usually self-limiting, hospitalization is generally not required. It is important to avoid unnecessary medications that can adversely affect liver function, for example acetaminophen .
Hospitalization is required for people with fulminant hepatitis and should also be considered for symptomatic pregnant women.
Prevention is the most effective approach against the infection. It is particularly important to guarantee that exposed pregnant women have access to appropriate information and prevention measures. At the population level, transmission of HEV and hepatitis E infection can be reduced by:
On an individual level, infection risk can be reduced by:
HEV prevention and disease control therefore primarily rely on water, sanitation, and hygiene measures which are often inadequately implemented in settings which would benefit most. Additionally, the development of the only currently available Hepatitis E vaccine, known as HEV 239 vaccine , marks an opportunity to protect vulnerable populations and curb disease outbreaks. The vaccine has been licensed for use in healthy adults aged ≥16 years in China since 2011 via intramuscular injection using a 3-dose schedule . The product is supplied in a pre-filled syringe with an approved shelf life of at least 36 months. In a large, phase III clinical trial in China, it exhibited a high efficacy rate and exhibited a good safety profile, notably in adults aged ≥16 year
In March 2022, a significant milestone in the field of hepatitis E vaccination was achieved on the African continent. In response to the hepatitis E outbreak in Bentiu, South Sudan, Médecins Sans Frontières supported the South Sudan Ministry of Health to implement a hepatitis E vaccination campaign. Three vaccination rounds were conducted, immunizing more than 24 000 people per round, including pregnant women. This was the first ever use of the vaccine to mitigate the consequences of an outbreak, as recommended by WHO in its 2015 Hepatitis E vaccine position paper. A second campaign was put in place in 2023 to respond to an outbreak in Fangak County, Jonglei State, South Sudan.
Hepatitis E vaccine was approved as the fifth vaccine under the International Coordinating Group mechanism. WHO is currently working with experts and global partners to make vaccines available as an outbreak response intervention. In addition, WHO issued the technical report Waterborne outbreaks of hepatitis E: recognition, investigation and control in 2014. The manual gives information about the epidemiology, clinical manifestations and diagnosis of hepatitis E. It also provides guidance for public health authorities on how to respond to outbreaks of hepatitis E infection.
WHO has a key role in global outbreak response and rapid detection and verification of health emergencies. WHO’s global surveillance system picks up public health threats 24 hours a day, 365 days a year. Hepatitis E outbreaks are regularly notified to WHO and the organization provides a coordinate 3-level response in support of its members states, if necessary. In 2024, WHO has played a central role in the coordination and response to HEV outbreaks in Chad, South Sudan and Central African Republic, among others. Global health sector strategies on, respectively, HIV, viral hepatitis, and sexually transmitted infections for the period 2022–2030 guide the health sector in implementing strategically focused responses to achieve the goals of ending AIDS, viral hepatitis and sexually transmitted infections by 2030.
WHO organizes annual World Hepatitis Day campaigns to increase awareness and understanding of viral hepatitis. For World Hepatitis Day 2024, WHO focused on the theme “It’s time for action” to illustrate the urgency of scaling up viral hepatitis prevention, testing and treatment to prevent liver diseases and cancer and achieve the 2030 hepatitis elimination target.
References
Related
News
Fact sheets
Events
More
Guidelines & manualsWHO position paper on hepatitis E vaccines 2015Hepatitis E waterborne outbreaksManual for the development of national viral hepatitis plansMore about hepatitisWHO's work on hepatitis Global Hepatitis ProgrammePublicationsWHO's publications
Guidelines & manuals
More about hepatitis
Publications

========================================
herpes-simplex-virus
========================================
Herpes simplex virus , known as herpes, is a common infection that can cause painful blisters or ulcers. It primarily spreads by skin-to-skin contact. It is treatable but not curable.
There are two types of herpes simplex virus. Type 1 mostly spreads by oral contact and causes infections in or around the mouth . It can also cause genital herpes. Most adults are infected with HSV-1. Type 2 spreads by sexual contact and causes genital herpes. Most people have no symptoms or only mild symptoms. The infection can cause painful blisters or ulcers that can recur over time. Medicines can reduce symptoms but can’t cure the infection. Recurrent symptoms of both oral and genital herpes may be distressing. Genital herpes may also be stigmatizing and have an impact on sexual relationships.
Most people with herpes have no symptoms or only mild symptoms. Many people aren’t aware they have the infection and can pass along the virus to others without knowing.
Symptoms can include painful, recurring blisters or ulcers. New infections may cause fever, body aches and swollen lymph nodes.
Symptoms may be different during the first episode of infection than during a recurrent episode. If symptoms occur, they often begin with tingling, itching or burning near where the sores will appear. Common oral herpes symptoms include blisters or open sores in or around the mouth or lips.
Common genital herpes symptoms include bumps, blisters, or open sores around the genitals or anus.
These sores and blisters are typically painful. Blisters may break open, ooze and then crust over. During their first infection, people may experience: People can have repeated outbreaks over time . These are usually shorter and less severe than the first outbreak.
Medicines are often used to treat first or recurrent symptomatic episodes of herpes. They can decrease how long symptoms last and how severe they are, but they can’t cure the infection.
Treatment for recurrent episodes is most effective when started within 48 hours of when symptoms begin. Antiviral medicines commonly given include acyclovir, famciclovir and valacyclovir.
Taking a lower dose of one of these medicines every day can also decrease how often symptoms occur.
Daily treatment is often recommended for people who get very painful or frequent recurrent episodes or who want to lower the risk of giving herpes to someone else.
Medicines to help with pain related to sores include paracetamol , naproxen or ibuprofen. Medicines that can be applied to numb the affected area include benzocaine and lidocaine.
Herpes simplex virus lives inside of nerve cells and alternates between being inactive and active. Certain triggers can reactivate the virus including:
For people whose oral herpes is activated by sunlight, avoiding sun exposure and wearing sunscreen can lower the risk of recurrences. To decrease symptoms of oral herpes, people can: For genital herpes, people can:
There are ways to lower the risk of spreading herpes including:
Talk to your healthcare provider if you are pregnant, because there is a risk of passing herpes to your baby. In 2020 , 3.8 billion people under the age of 50, or 64% of the global population, had HSV-1 infection . Most HSV-1 infections are acquired during childhood to cause oral herpes. Around 10% of these were estimated to be genital infections occurring in 15–49-year-olds.
Genital herpes caused by HSV-2 affects an estimated 520 million people aged 15–49 years worldwide . HSV-2 infects women almost twice as often as men because sexual transmission is more efficient from men to women. Prevalence increases with age, though the highest number of new infections are in adolescents and young adults.
An estimated 205 million people aged 15–49 experienced at least one symptomatic episode of genital herpes in 2020. The majority of these people had symptoms related to HSV-2 infection. HSV-2 is much more likely than genital HSV-1 infection to cause recurrent symptoms.
HSV-1 is mainly transmitted via contact with the virus in sores, saliva or skin surfaces in or around the mouth. Less commonly, HSV-1 can be transmitted to the genital area through oral-genital contact to cause genital herpes. It can be transmitted from oral or skin surfaces that appear normal; however, the greatest risk of transmission is when there are active sores. People who already have HSV-1 are not at risk of reinfection with HSV-1, but they are still at risk of acquiring HSV-2.
HSV-2 is mainly transmitted during sex through contact with genital or anal surfaces, skin, sores or fluids of someone infected with the virus. HSV-2 can be transmitted even if the skin looks normal and is often transmitted in the absence of symptoms. In rare circumstances, herpes can be transmitted from mother to child during delivery, causing neonatal herpes.
HSV-2 infection increases the risk of acquiring HIV infection by approximately three-fold. Additionally, people with both HIV and HSV-2 infection are more likely to spread HIV to others. HSV-2 infection is among the most common infections in people living with HIV.
In immunocompromised people, including those with advanced HIV infection, herpes can have more severe symptoms and more frequent recurrences. Rare complications of HSV-2 include meningoencephalitis and disseminated infection. Rarely, HSV-1 infection can lead to more severe complications such as encephalitis or keratitis .
Neonatal herpes can occur when an infant is exposed to HSV during delivery. Neonatal herpes is rare, occurring in an estimated 10 out of every 100 000 births globally. However, it is a serious condition that can lead to lasting neurologic disability or death. The risk for neonatal herpes is greatest when a mother acquires HSV for the first time in late pregnancy.
People with symptoms of oral herpes should avoid oral contact with others and sharing objects that touched saliva. Individuals with symptoms of genital herpes should abstain from sexual activity while experiencing symptoms. Both HSV-1 and HSV-2 are most contagious when sores are present but can also be transmitted when no symptoms are felt or visible.
For sexually active people, consistent and correct use of condoms is the best way to prevent genital herpes and other STIs. Condoms reduce the risk; however, HSV infection can still occur through contact with genital or anal areas not covered by the condom. Medical male circumcision can provide life-long partial protection against HSV-2 infection, as well as against HIV and human papillomavirus . People with symptoms suggestive of genital herpes should be offered HIV testing.
Pregnant women with symptoms of genital herpes should inform their health care providers. Preventing acquisition of HSV-2 infection is particularly important for women in late pregnancy when the risk for neonatal herpes is greatest. WHO is working to increase awareness about HSV infection and its symptoms, improve access to antiviral medications, and promote HIV prevention efforts for those with genital herpes, such as pre-exposure prophylaxis . WHO and partners are also supporting research to develop new strategies for prevention and control of HSV infections, such as vaccines and topical microbicides.
References
Related
Fact sheets
More
Estimated global and regional incidence and prevalence of herpes simplex virus infections and genital ulcer disease in 2020: Mathematical modeling analyses, medRxiv 2024More about sexually transmitted diseasesGlobal STIs ProgrammeChickenpox: questions and answers

========================================
hiv-aids
========================================
Human immunodeficiency virus is a virus that attacks the body’s immune system. Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome occurs at the most advanced stage of infection.
HIV targets the body’s white blood cells, weakening the immune system. This makes it easier to get sick with diseases like tuberculosis, infections and some cancers.
HIV is spread from the body fluids of an infected person, including blood, breast milk, semen and vaginal fluids. It is not spread by kisses, hugs or sharing food. It can also spread from a mother to her baby.
HIV can be prevented and treated with antiretroviral therapy . Untreated HIV can progress to AIDS, often after many years.
WHO now defines Advanced HIV Disease as CD4 cell count less than 200 cells/mm3 or WHO stage 3 or 4 in adults and adolescents. All children younger than 5 years of age living with HIV are considered to have advanced HIV disease.
The symptoms of HIV vary depending on the stage of infection.
HIV spreads more easily in the first few months after a person is infected, but many are unaware of their status until the later stages. In the first few weeks after being infected people may not experience symptoms. Others may have an influenza-like illness including:
The infection progressively weakens the immune system. This can cause other signs and symptoms:
Without treatment, people living with HIV infection can also develop severe illnesses:
HIV causes other infections to get worse, such as hepatitis C, hepatitis B and mpox.
HIV can be transmitted via the exchange of body fluids from people living with HIV, including blood, breast milk, semen, and vaginal secretions. HIV can also be transmitted to a child during pregnancy and delivery. People cannot become infected with HIV through ordinary day-to-day contact such as kissing, hugging, shaking hands, or sharing personal objects, food or water.
People living with HIV who are taking ART and have an undetectable viral load will not transmit HIV to their sexual partners. Early access to ART and support to remain on treatment is therefore critical not only to improve the health of people living with HIV but also to prevent HIV transmission.
Behaviours and conditions that put people at greater risk of contracting HIV include:
HIV can be diagnosed through rapid diagnostic tests that provide same-day results. This greatly facilitates early diagnosis and linkage with treatment and prevention. People can also use HIV self-tests to test themselves. However, no single test can provide a full HIV positive diagnosis; confirmatory testing is required, conducted by a qualified and trained health worker or community worker. HIV infection can be detected with great accuracy using WHO prequalified tests within a nationally approved testing strategy and algorithm.
Most widely used HIV diagnostic tests detect antibodies produced by a person as part of their immune response to fight HIV. In most cases, people develop antibodies to HIV within 28 days of infection. During this time, people are in the so-called “window period” when they have low levels of antibodies which cannot be detected by many rapid tests, but they may still transmit HIV to others. People who have had a recent high-risk exposure and test negative can have a further test after 28 days.
Following a positive diagnosis, people should be retested before they are enrolled in treatment and care to rule out any potential testing or reporting error. While testing for adolescents and adults has been made simple and efficient, this is not the case for babies born to HIV-positive mothers. For children less than 18 months of age, rapid antibody testing is not sufficient to identify HIV infection – virological testing must be provided as early as birth or at 6 weeks of age. New technologies are now available to perform this test at the point of care and enable same-day results, which will accelerate appropriate linkage with treatment and care.
HIV is a preventable disease. Reduce the risk of HIV infection by:
Doctors may suggest medicines and medical devices to help prevent HIV infection, including:
ARVs can also be used to prevent mothers from passing HIV to their children.
People taking antiretroviral therapy and who have no evidence of virus in the blood will not pass HIV to their sexual partners. Access to testing and ART is an important part of preventing HIV.
When given before possible exposures to HIV it is called pre-exposure prophylaxis and when given after an exposure it is called post-exposure prophylaxis . People can use PrEP or PEP when the risk of contracting HIV is high; people should seek advice from a clinician when thinking about using PrEP or PEP.
There is no cure for HIV infection. It is treated with antiretroviral drugs, which stop the virus from replicating in the body.
Current antiretroviral therapy does not cure HIV infection but allows a person’s immune system to get stronger. This helps them to fight other infections.
Currently, ART must be taken every day for the rest of a person’s life.
ART lowers the amount of the virus in a person’s body. This stops symptoms and allows people to live full and healthy lives. People living with HIV who are taking ART and who have no evidence of virus in the blood will not spread the virus to their sexual partners.
Pregnant women with HIV should have access to, and take, ART as soon as possible. This protects the health of the mother and will help prevent HIV transmission to the fetus before birth, or through breast milk.
Advanced HIV disease remains a persistent problem in the HIV response. WHO is supporting countries to implement the advanced HIV disease package of care to reduce illness and death. Newer HIV medicines and short course treatments for opportunistic infections like cryptococcal meningitis are being developed that may change the way people take ART and prevention medicines, including access to injectable formulations, in the future.
More information on HIV treatments
Global health sector strategies on HIV, viral hepatitis, and sexually transmitted infections for the period 2022–2030 guide strategic responses to achieve the goals of ending AIDS, viral hepatitis B and C, and sexually transmitted infections by 2030.
WHO’s Global HIV, Hepatitis and STIs Programmes recommend shared and disease-specific country actions supported by WHO and partners. They consider the epidemiological, technological, and contextual shifts of previous years, foster learning, and create opportunities to leverage innovation and new knowledge.
WHO’s programmes call to reach the people most affected and most at risk for each disease, and to address inequities. Under a framework of universal health coverage and primary health care, WHO’s programmes contribute to achieving the goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Related
News
Facts in pictures

========================================
hiv-drug-resistance
========================================
Over the past decade, the world has witnessed an unprecedented increase in the use of antiretroviral therapy , which has saved the lives of tens of millions of people living with HIV. At the end of December 2022, 29.8 million people were accessing ART, up from 7.7 million in 2010.
Increased use of HIV medicines has been accompanied by the emergence of HIV drug resistance, the levels of which have steadily increased in recent years. HIV drug resistance is caused by changes in the genetic structure of HIV that affect the ability of medicines to block the replication of the virus. All antiretroviral drugs, including those from newer drug classes, are at risk of becoming partially or fully inactive due to the emergence of drug-resistant virus. If not prevented, HIV drug resistance can jeopardize the efficacy of medicines used to treat HIV (1), resulting in increased numbers of HIV infections and HIV-associated morbidity and mortality (2). Surveillance of HIV drug resistance provides countries with evidence that can be used to optimize patient- and population-level treatment outcomes. WHO recommends that countries routinely implement HIV drug resistance surveys in different populations, including adults, children and adolescents, and PrEP users diagnosed with HIV.
WHO’s brief 2024 HIV drug resistance report summarizes recent information, with a focus on HIV drug resistance in the era of integrase-strand transfer inhibitors for HIV prevention and treatment.
Viral load suppression – the goal of HIV treatment – significantly contributes to preventing the emergence of HIV drug resistance. When viral load suppression is achieved and maintained, drug-resistant HIV is less likely to emerge. As documented in WHO’s brief 2024 HIV drug resistance report, global data remain limited regarding emergence of HIV drug resistance to dolutegravir; however, in published cohorts DGT resistance has been observed in up to 4.8% of participants without viral suppression. Recent studies supported by the United States President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief in 4 low- and middle-income countries report prevalence estimates of DTG resistance among individuals receiving DTG-based ART with detectable viraemia ranging from 3.9% in people without viral suppression on ART for at least 9 months to 19.6% in people with heavy prior treatment experience. More data from standardized surveys of acquired HIV drug resistance and from longitudinal observational cohorts are needed from countries in all regions to provide enhanced insight into risk factors and patterns of drug resistance emergence among individuals exposed to DGT-based ART regimens. WHO recommends that countries implement routine surveillance of acquired HIV drug resistance in adults, children and adolescents receiving ART either using a viral load laboratory-based method, an ART clinic-based method, or a sentinel survey approach. Which method is used depends upon national viral load testing coverage, the availability of deidentified demographic information, and funding.
Drug resistance can be found in some people before they begin treatment. This type of resistance can either be transmitted at the time of infection or acquired during previous treatments.
WHO recommends surveillance of HIV drug resistance in adults initiating or reinitiating ART and in treatment naive infants initiating ART to inform optimal selection of first-line regimens.
Eleven countries reported data to WHO on the prevalence of pretreatment HIV drug resistance to DTG among adults initiating ART. Only one country detected DTG at a very low prevalence of 0.2%, which was attributed to a rare non-polymorphic integrase mutation. However, these surveys were conducted before DTG was introduced or during the early stages of transition in these countries and thus cannot provide evidence of an absence of DTG resistance in populations initiating or reinitiating ART as scale-up and maintenance on DTG-based ART continues.
The levels of pretreatment rilpivirine resistance among individuals initiating ART without previous exposure to ARV drugs ranged from 0.0% in Tajikistan in 2016 to a high of 16.6% in Eswatini. These data suggest that if RPV were to be used in combination with cabotegravir as a long-acting ART, pretreatment HIV drug resistance testing would be needed in some settings to identify those without RPV drug resistance because pretreatment RPV drug resistance mutations are a risk factor for failure to suppress viral load among people treated with long-acting cabotegravir in combination with RPV. To date, only one country has reported data from a survey of HIV drug resistance among infants after introducing DTG-containing regimens. One infant with DTG resistance was identified whose mother had been receiving DTG-based ART. The surveillance of HIV drug resistance among treatment-naive infants newly diagnosed with HIV remains highly relevant in the era of DTG-based ART, and accelerated implementation of these surveys is needed. Moreover, effective management of high viral loads among pregnant and breastfeeding women is critical to prevent transmitting HIV to infants. Many people living in situations considered high risk for exposure to HIV take medicines to reduce the chance of acquiring the disease. WHO recommends pre-exposure prophylaxis be offered as an additional choice for HIV prevention.
HIV infection is infrequent among individuals taking PrEP. However, among people becoming HIV infected despite the use of PrEP, the emergence of drug resistance is common. Drug resistance can reduce HIV treatment options due to the overlapping resistance profiles between antiretroviral drugs used for both PrEP and treatment.
In a literature review published in WHO’s 2024 HIV drug resistance report, of 310 reported seroconversions occurring while on oral tenofovir-containing PrEP between 2020 and 2023 in clinical settings, 20% had tenofovir or lamivudine drug resistance, with the prevalence of drug resistance more than 10-fold higher if PrEP was initiated during undiagnosed infection. Although the risk of acquiring HIV is substantially reduced among long acting cabotegravir PrEP users, to date, 10 cases of integrase inhibitor drug resistance have been reported among people who received long acting cabotegravir PrEP, and all 10 cases had mutations that confer cross-resistance to dolutegravir.
To monitor the effectiveness of HIV medicines used for both treatment and prevention, WHO recommends that countries implement nationally representative surveys to monitor the levels of HIV drug resistance among people initiating treatment, people receiving treatment and among people using PrEP who acquire HIV. Minimizing the emergence and spread of HIV drug resistance is a critical aspect of the broader global response to antimicrobial resistance and requires coordinated action across all government sectors and levels of society.
WHO’s Global action plan on HIV drug resistance 2017–2021, aligned with the Global action plan on antimicrobial resistance resistance and the HIV drug resistance strategy, 2021 update outline key actions for country and global stakeholders to prevent, monitor and respond to HIV drug resistance and to protect the ongoing progress towards achieving the global targets for HIV epidemic control by 2030. The key actions are:
WHO’s Report on the Global action plan on HIV drug resistance 2017–2021 summarizes the plan’s successes, impact and shortfalls using pre-established indicators qualitative interviews of key stakeholders at all levels. The report summarizes the findings of the assessment and paves the way for development of a unified Global Action Plan for HIV, viral hepatitis and sexually transmitted infection drug resistance. References
Related
Tackling HIV drug resistance
Global HIV Programme - HIV drug resistance News
Fact sheets
Facts in pictures

========================================
household-air-pollution-and-health
========================================
Worldwide, around 2.1 billion people still cook using solid fuels and kerosene in open fires and inefficient stoves (1). Most of these people are poor and live in low- and middle-income countries. There is a large discrepancy in access to cleaner cooking alternatives between urban and rural areas: in 2021, only 14% of people in urban areas relied on polluting fuels and technologies, compared with 49% of the global rural population. Household air pollution is generated by the use of inefficient and polluting fuels and technologies in and around the home that contains a range of health-damaging pollutants, including small particles that penetrate deep into the lungs and enter the bloodstream. In poorly ventilated dwellings, indoor smoke can have levels of fine particles 100 times higher than acceptable. Exposure is particularly high among women and children, who spend the most time near the domestic hearth. Reliance on polluting fuels and technologies also require significant time for cooking on an inefficient device, and gathering and preparing fuel. In light of the widespread use of polluting fuels and stoves for cooking, WHO issued a set of normative guidance, the Guidelines for indoor air quality: household fuel combustion, which offer practical evidence-based guidance on what fuels and technologies used in the home can be considered clean, including recommendations discouraging use of kerosene and recommending against use of unprocessed coal; specifying the performance of fuels and technologies needed to protect health; and emphasizing the importance of addressing all household energy uses, particularly cooking, space heating and lighting to ensure benefits for health and the environment. WHO defines fuels and technologies that are clean for health at the point of use as solar, electricity, biogas, liquefied petroleum gas , natural gas, alcohol fuels, as well as biomass stoves that meet the emission targets in the WHO Guidelines. Without strong policy action, 1.8 billion people are estimated to still lack access to clean fuels and technologies in 2030 (1). There is a particularly critical need for action in sub-Saharan Africa, where population growth has outpaced access to clean cooking, and 923 million people lacked access in 2022. Strategies to increase the adoption of clean household energy include policies that provide financial support to purchase cleaner technologies and fuels, improved ventilation or housing design, and communication campaigns to encourage clean energy use. Each year, 3.2 million people die prematurely from illnesses attributable to the household air pollution caused by the incomplete combustion of solid fuels and kerosene used for cooking . Particulate matter and other pollutants in household air pollution inflame the airways and lungs, impair immune response and reduce the oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood.
Among these 3.2 million deaths from household air pollution exposure:
Household air pollution accounted for the loss of an estimated 86 million healthy life years in 2019, with the largest burden falling on women living in low- and middle-income countries. Almost half of all deaths due to lower respiratory infection among children under 5 years of age are caused by inhaling particulate matter from household air pollution. There is also evidence of links between household air pollution and low birth weight, tuberculosis, cataract, nasopharyngeal and laryngeal cancers.
Significant policy changes are needed to rapidly increase the number of people with access to clean fuels and technologies by 2030 to address health inequities, achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and mitigate climate change.
WHO provides technical support and capacity building to countries and regions to evaluate and scale-up health-promoting household fuels and technologies. To address household air pollution and its negative impact on health, WHO:
References
Related
News
Fact sheets
Facts in pictures
Feature stories
Documents
More
Accelerating access to electricity in health-care facilitiesSynthesizing evidence and knowledge on air pollutionIdentifying solutions for countries

========================================
human-rights-and-health
========================================
Key facts Human rights are enshrined in human rights instruments. All WHO Member States have ratified at least one international human rights treaty that includes the right to the highest attainable standard of health. After ratifying a treaty, a country has a legal obligation to protect and fulfil the rights recognized in the treaty. To deliver on binding human rights commitments countries need to adopt a human rights-based approach to health. The right to the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health is enshrined in several international legal instruments including the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. It includes freedoms and entitlements. Freedoms include the right to control one’s health and body and to be free from interference (for example, free from torture and non-consensual medical treatment and experimentation, particularly relevant for persons with disabilities). Entitlements include the right to access quality health services without any discrimination. A human rights-based approach to health commits countries to develop rights-compliant, effective, gender transformative, integrated, accountable health systems and implement other public health measures that improve the underlying determinants of health, like access to water and sanitation. This means countries must ensure legislation and health policies and programmes respect and advance the realization of human rights. Research shows that proactive measures to comply with human rights obligations help countries improve substantive equality and build resilience to shocks. For example, applying a human rights framework to reproductive health can help us identify how preventable maternal mortality and morbidity results from a variety of human rights violations including discrimination and lack of access to quality health services. A human rights-based approach requires mainstreaming fundamental human rights principles and standards across health services and health system policies, including public health emergency preparation and responses. They include: Non-discrimination and equality: This requires prioritizing the needs of those furthest behind to achieve equity. Equity is used as a framework in public health to identify and address unfair and remediable health disparities among different sub-populations. HRBA provides legal standards and obligations to put legal protections for equality and non-discrimination into action. Addressing discrimination requires attention to overlapping and intersecting factors of discrimination notably gender, race, ethnicity, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity and socioeconomic status. An intersectional lens allows for the examination of health inequalities driven by multiple grounds of exclusion and for health interventions to be designed in a way that responds to intersecting factors. This would include, for example, ensuring that health information is provided in formats that allow people to access the information they need. Participation: Participation requires empowering health service users, communities and civil society to engage in planning, decision-making and implementation processes for health across the programme cycle and at all levels of the system. To be meaningful, participation must include explicit strategies to address power imbalances, value experiential evidence, and manage conflicts of interest so that the needs and expectations of people are met. Participatory planning techniques can be used to engage beneficiary populations in designing health services or public spending prioritization.
Accountability: Countries must establish accessible and effective accountability mechanisms. These may include administrative and judicial remedies and oversight by other institutions, such as national human rights institutions and health and social care regulators. The United Nations human rights mechanisms, including the Committee on Economic Social and Cultural Rights, play a crucial accountability role by regularly reviewing countries’ compliance with their health-related human rights obligations. There is a growing recognition of the importance of regulation of non-State actors, such as the private sector and non-governmental organizations, to ensure they respect and protect human rights. For example, by enacting bans on tobacco advertising, promotion and sponsorship , countries are implementing their commitments to manage tobacco control under the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control. One third of countries (66), representing a quarter of the world’s population, have completely banned all forms of TAPS. Some human rights obligations are of immediate effect, such as the guarantee of non-discrimination. Other components of the right to health, like access to cutting edge health technology, are subject to the principle of progressive realization. Countries are legally obliged to use the maximum available resources to develop and implement rights-based legislation, policies and programmes. Countries in a position to assist have an obligation to cooperate with those with fewer resources.
The right to health includes 4 essential, interrelated elements: availability, accessibility, acceptability and quality. Availability refers to the need for a sufficient quantity of functioning health facilities, goods and services for all. Availability can be measured through the analysis of disaggregated data to different stratifiers including by age, sex, location and socio-economic status and qualitative surveys to understand coverage gaps. Accessibility requires that health facilities, goods, and services must be accessible to everyone. Accessibility has four dimensions: non-discrimination, physical accessibility, economic accessibility and information accessibility. This is particularly important for persons with disabilities who often encounter significant barriers to health related to the inaccessibility of services, facilities and health information. Assessing accessibility requires analysis of physical, geographical, financial and other barriers to health systems and services, and how they may affect people who are marginalized. It requires the establishment or application of clear norms and standards in both law and policy to address these barriers. Acceptability relates to respect for medical ethics, culturally appropriate, and sensitivity to gender. Acceptability requires that health facilities, goods, services and programmes are people-centred and cater to the specific needs of diverse population groups and in accordance with international standards of medical ethics for confidentiality and informed consent. Quality extends to the underlying determinants of health, for example safe and potable water and sanitation as well as requiring that health facilities, goods, and services are scientifically and medically approved. Quality is a key component of universal health coverage . Quality health services should be: WHO supports countries to deliver on their human rights commitment to ensure non-discriminatory access to effective, quality health services and the underlying determinants of health. To achieve this goal WHO: Related
Related health topics
News
Fact sheets

========================================
human-papilloma-virus-and-cancer
========================================
Human papillomavirus is a common sexually transmitted infection. Almost all sexually active people will be infected at some point in their lives, usually without symptoms.
HPV can affect the skin, genital area and throat. Condoms help prevent HPV but do not offer total protection because they do not cover all the genital skin.
HPV usually goes away on its own without treatment. Some HPV infections cause genital warts. Others can cause abnormal cells to develop, which go on to become cancer.
Cancers from HPV can be prevented with vaccines.
The vaccine does not contain any live virus or DNA from the virus so it cannot cause cancer or other HPV-related illnesses. The HPV vaccine is not used to treat HPV infections or diseases caused by HPV, but instead to prevent the development of cancers.
Currently, cervical cancer is the only HPV-caused cancer for which screening tests are available. Screening tests are used to check for disease when there are no symptoms. The goal of screening for cervical cancer is to find precancerous cell changes before they become cancer and when treatment can prevent cancer from developing. Screening for cervical cancer is an important part of routine health care for people who have a cervix. This includes women and transgender men who still have a cervix. Cervical cancer is the most common type of cancer caused by HPV, other less common cancers affecting men and women, including anal, vulvar, vaginal, mouth/throat and penile cancers. The highest prevalence of cervical HPV among women is in sub-Saharan Africa , followed by Latin America and the Caribbean , eastern Europe , and South-East Asia (2). Prevalence in men is highly variable based on sexual trends.
Evidence showed that prevalence of the virus is higher among women living with HIV, men who have sex with men, immunocompromised individuals, people with co-infection with other sexually transmitted infections , people who receive immunosuppressive medications and children who have been through sexual abuse.
Globally, it is estimated that 620 000 new cancer cases in women and 70 000 new cancer cases in men were caused by HPV in 2019 (1). Cervical cancer was the fourth leading cause of cancer and cancer deaths in women in 2022, with some 660 000 new cases and around 350 000 deaths worldwide (3). Cervical cancers account for over 90% of HPV-related cancers in women (1). The highest rates of cervical cancer incidence and mortality are in low- and middle-income countries. This reflects major inequities driven by lack of access to national HPV vaccination, cervical screening and treatment services, and social and economic determinants.
Most people will not have any symptoms from an HPV infection. The immune system usually clears HPV from the body within a year or two with no lasting effects.
Some HPV infections cause small rough lumps that can appear on the vagina, penis or anus and rarely the throat. They may be painful, itchy or bleed or cause swollen glands.
HPV infection that does not go away on its own can cause changes to cervical cells, which lead to precancers that may become cervical cancer if left untreated. It usually takes 15–20 years for cervical cancer to develop after HPV infection.
The early changes in cervical cells and precancers mostly do not cause symptoms. Symptoms of cervical cancer may include bleeding between periods or after sexual intercourse or a foul-smelling vaginal discharge. These symptoms may be due to other diseases. People with these symptoms should speak to their healthcare provider.
Being vaccinated is the best way to prevent HPV infection, cervical cancer and other HPV-related cancers. Screening can detect cervical precancers that can be treated before they develop into cancer.
HPV vaccines should be given to all girls aged 9–14 years, before they become sexually active.
The vaccine may be given as 1 or 2 doses. People with reduced immune systems should receive 2 or 3 doses. Check with your healthcare provider to determine what is best for you.
Using condoms during sex is an important way to prevent HPV infection. Voluntary male circumcision also reduces the risk of infection. Being a non-smoker or stopping smoking reduces the chances of developing persistent HPV infection.
Testing cells from a woman’s cervix for HPV is used to screen women for cervical cancer. Women should be screened every 5–10 years starting at age 30. Women living with HIV should be screened every 3 years starting at age 25.
After a positive HPV test , a healthcare provider can look for changes on the cervix or precancers that could develop into cervical cancer if left untreated. Treatment of precancers prevents cervical cancer. Precancers rarely cause symptoms, which is why regular screening to check cervical health is important.
Learn more about vaccination of boys and older age groups: WHO position paper
There is currently no treatment for HPV infection. Treatments exist for genital warts, cervical precancers and cervical cancer.
Non-cancerous genital warts and precancerous lesions in the cervix, vagina, vulva, anus or penis can be removed or treated by ablation or with surgery.
Currently, cancer of the cervix is the only HPV-caused cancer for which screening tests are available.
Treatments for cancers caused by HPV are more effective if diagnosed early. Treatment should begin quickly after diagnosis.
Learn more about cervical precancer treatment here: WHO fact sheet on cervical cancer
Management pathways for invasive cancer care are important tools to ensure that a patient is referred promptly and supported as they navigate the steps to diagnosis and treatment decisions. A multidisciplinary team should ensure diagnosis and staging takes place prior to treatment decisions which could include surgery, radiotherapy and systemic therapy such as chemotherapy. Treatment decisions should be in line with national guidelines and interventions should be supported by holistic psychological, spiritual, physical and palliative care. As low- and middle-income countries scale-up cervical screening, more cases of invasive cervical cancer will be detected, especially in previously unscreened populations. Therefore, referral and treatment strategies need to be implemented and expanded alongside prevention services. Giving the global public health burden of cervical cancer caused by HPV, the World Health Assembly adopted the Global strategy to accelerate the elimination of cervical cancer as a public health problem with the following targets: Prevention of HPV-associated precancer and cancer is also a key element of WHO’s Global health sector strategy on, respectively, HIV, hepatitis and sexually transmitted infections, 2022–2030 and the resolution WHA74.5 on oral health includes actions on mouth/throat cancers. The joint work of the WHO at global, regional and national level, alongside UN sister agencies delivers to: References
News
Fact sheets

========================================
icd-11
========================================
ICD–11 is the international standard for systematic recording, reporting, analysis, interpretation and comparison of mortality and morbidity data. This 11th revision is the result of an unprecedented collaboration with clinicians, statisticians, classification and IT experts from around the world, making it useable by these groups, as well as by coders.
ICD–11 allows countries to count and identify their most pressing health issues by using an up-to-date and clinically relevant classification system. Health conditions and accidents are assigned ICD–11 codes, resulting in data that can be used by governments to design effective public health policies, and measure their impact, or used for clinical recording.
For the first time, ICD is fully electronic, currently providing access to 17 000 diagnostic categories, with over 100 000 medical diagnostic index terms. The index-based search algorithm interprets more than 1.6 million terms. ICD–11 is easy to install and use online or offline, using free 'container' software. ICD–11 is a vast improvement on previous revisions. It reflects critical advances in science and medicine, aligning classification with the latest knowledge of disease treatment and prevention. There is more meaningful clinical content than ICD–10.
A significant feature of ICD–11 is the improved ease and accuracy of coding requiring less user training than ever before, together with the availability of online and offline functioning. ICD–11 is digital health ready, for use in multiple IT-environments, with a new API. It is presented together with a suite of web services, including multilingual support and in-built user guidance.
A proposal platform allows all interested parties to suggest changes or additions to ICD–11 and to viewed and discussed transparently. The ICD–11 translation tool ensures internationally consistent translations and the addition of locally used terms.
New core chapters include 'Diseases of the immune system’, 'Sleep-wake disorders’, and 'Conditions related to sexual health’. New supplementary chapters and sections permit the assessment of functioning, and the optional recording of traditional medicine diagnoses.
All concepts for recording and reporting in primary care are included.
Overall coding improvements in ICD–11 allow more precise and more detailed data recording and collection. However, newly available clinical precision is possible. Examples include:
The creation of extension codes allows flexible addition of detail relevant for clinical documentation, and device or substance safety. Extension codes provide for the recording of medicaments with WHO INN and WHO Medical Device nomenclature, as well as documenting the severity of conditions, anatomy or histopathology.
Meaningful data for prevention, resourcing or evaluation are best produced with a standardised classification that is based on the latest medical and scientific knowledge.
ICD–10 is scientifically and technologically outdated; it is missing content for several de-facto uses of ICD, like primary care or clinical decisions.
ICD–11 is a flexible system which eliminates the need for local variants and allows to document all kind of clinical detail. In such a way, and in combination with the simplified coding, it can be integrated seamlessly in the routine of clinical documentation.
ICD–11 lowers the costs for using ICD because correct use requires less training and less time for coding, and as such allows the implementation of standard reporting in places where it has not been possible to use ICD before. It is free for use in all countries, as a package with user guides and tools, providing inexpensive coding of patient encounters in the clinical setting. ICD–11 is flexible in the level of detail captured, it can be adapted to the primary care setting, for surveillance of rare conditions, to generate adverse event reporting inpatient quality and safety management, and to the use of casemix for reimbursement and resource allocation is possible.
Alternative applications include using ICD–11 as a multilingual dictionary, or as a terminology server for studies, surveys and other areas of recording of health information.
In response to Member State needs for moving to ICD–11, WHO is providing technical assistance to help countries develop their national implementation plans and to strengthen their health and surveillance systems. WHO has already undertaken training workshops in several WHO Regions. Early adopters start implementation, providing valuable information to other countries for that process. Technical support by WHO includes instructions on the use of the translation platform and integration of the ICD–11 coding tooling in a local information system.
The ICD–11 implementation package includes all information, tools, training materials, mapping tables and more in support to use of ICD.
The ICD–11 Proposal platform and translation tool is open to all interested parties and facilitates the ongoing update process, and the translation tool allows translations by the clinical community who uses ICD.
The time and amount necessary for the implementation of ICD-11 largely will depend on two factors:
As as an estimate, a Member State newly introducing ICD-11 in a simple information system may need 1-2 years. Member States with a highly sophisticated information system where earlier versions of ICD are already in use calculate 4-5 years time necessary for the implementation of a new version of ICD.
In the cause of death coding, ICD-11 facilitates the transition from ICD-10, and the ICD Startup Mortality List . ICD is part of the WHO Family of International Health Related Classifications .
ICD, the International Classification for Health Interventions and the International Classification for Functioning, Disability and Health are the core classifications that are complemented by Classifications for Nursing, Primary Care or Medicaments . Primary care has been incorporated in ICD-11, and the Medicaments, as well as cancer histopathology , have been embedded in ICD-11 The Global Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance System WHO International Nonproprietary Names facilitate the identification of pharmaceutical substances or active pharmaceutical ingredients. Each INN is a unique name that is globally recognised and is public property. A nonproprietary name is also known as a generic name. Related

========================================
hypertension
========================================
Overview
Hypertension is when the pressure in your blood vessels is too high . It is common but can be serious if not treated.
People with high blood pressure may not feel symptoms. The only way to know is to get your blood pressure checked.
Things that increase the risk of having high blood pressure include:
Lifestyle changes like eating a healthier diet, quitting tobacco and being more active can help lower blood pressure. Some people may still need to take medicines.
Blood pressure is written as two numbers. The first number represents the pressure in blood vessels when the heart contracts or beats. The second number represents the pressure in the vessels when the heart rests between beats.Hypertension is diagnosed if, when it is measured on two different days, the systolic blood pressure readings on both days is ≥140 mmHg and/or the diastolic blood pressure readings on both days is ≥90 mmHg.
Modifiable risk factors include unhealthy diets (excessive salt consumption, a diet high in saturated fat and trans fats, low intake of fruits and vegetables), physical inactivity, consumption of tobacco and alcohol, and being overweight or obese. In addition, there are environmental risk factors for hypertension and associated diseases, where air pollution is the most significant. Non-modifiable risk factors include a family history of hypertension, age over 65 years and co-existing diseases such as diabetes or kidney disease.
Most people with hypertension don’t feel any symptoms. Very high blood pressures can cause headaches, blurred vision, chest pain and other symptoms. Checking your blood pressure is the best way to know if you have high blood pressure. If hypertension isn’t treated, it can cause other health conditions like kidney disease, heart disease and stroke. People with very high blood pressure can experience symptoms including:
If you are experiencing any of these symptoms and a high blood pressure, seek care immediately.
The only way to detect hypertension is to have a health professional measure blood pressure. Having blood pressure measured is quick and painless. Although individuals can measure their own blood pressure using automated devices, an evaluation by a health professional is important for assessment of risk and associated conditions.
Lifestyle changes can help lower high blood pressure. These include:
If you have high blood pressure, your doctor may recommend one or more medicines. Your recommended blood pressure goal may depend on what other health conditions you have. Blood pressure goal is less than 130/80 if you have:
For most people, the goal is to have a blood pressure less than 140/90. There are several common blood pressure medicines: Lifestyle changes can help lower high blood pressure and can help anyone with hypertension. Many who make these changes will still need to take medicine. These lifestyle changes can help prevent and lower high blood pressure. Do: Don’t:
Reducing hypertension prevents heart attack, stroke and kidney damage, as well as other health problems. Reduce the risks of hypertension by: Among other complications, hypertension can cause serious damage to the heart. Excessive pressure can harden arteries, decreasing the flow of blood and oxygen to the heart. This elevated pressure and reduced blood flow can cause: Hypertension can also burst or block arteries that supply blood and oxygen to the brain, causing a stroke.
In addition, hypertension can cause kidney damage, leading to kidney failure.
The prevalence of hypertension varies across regions and country income groups. The WHO African Region has the highest prevalence of hypertension while the WHO Region of the Americas has the lowest prevalence of hypertension . The number of adults with hypertension increased from 594 million in 1975 to 1.13 billion in 2015, with the increase seen largely in low- and middle-income countries. This increase is due mainly to a rise in hypertension risk factors in those populations.
The World Health Organization supports countries to reduce hypertension as a public health problem.
In 2021, WHO released a new guideline for on the pharmacological treatment of hypertension in adults. The publication provides evidence-based recommendations for the initiation of treatment of hypertension, and recommended intervals for follow-up. The document also includes target blood pressure to be achieved for control, and information on who, in the health-care system, can initiate treatment. To support governments in strengthening the prevention and control of cardiovascular disease, WHO and the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention launched the Global Hearts Initiative in September 2016, which includes the HEARTS technical package. The six modules of the HEARTS technical package (Healthy-lifestyle counselling, Evidence-based treatment protocols, Access to essential medicines and technology, Risk-based management, Team-based care, and Systems for monitoring) provide a strategic approach to improve cardiovascular health in countries across the world. In September 2017, WHO began a partnership with Resolve to Save Lives, an initiative of Vital Strategies, to support national governments to implement the Global Hearts Initiative. Other partners contributing to the Global Hearts Initiative are the CDC Foundation, the Global Health Advocacy Incubator, the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, the Pan American Health Organization and the U.S. CDC. Since implementation of the programme in 2017 in 31 countries low- and middle-income countries, 7.5 million people have been put on protocol-based hypertension treatment through person-centred models of care. These programmes demonstrate the feasibility and effectiveness of standardized hypertension control programmes.
Related
News
Fact sheets
Feature stories

========================================
human-t-lymphotropic-virus-type-1
========================================
Human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 is a retrovirus, similar to HIV, which causes a chronic lifelong infection in humans. Its transmission happens through breast feeding, sexual contact, needle sharing and unsafe blood transfusions. It causes a range of clinical manifestations including poor functioning immune system , inflammation of the eye and skin , and pneumonia . HTLV-1 may lead to cancer in some people and various neurological complications such as myelopathy and spastic paraparesis. HTLV-1 is primarily transmitted through breast feeding, sexual contact, needle sharing and unsafe blood transfusion. Mother-to-infant transmission occurs primarily through breastfeeding at a rate of around 20–30%, with shorter durations of breastfeeding associated with lower rates of transmission. Women are more frequently affected by HTLV than men for reasons that are not well-understood. This might reflect higher efficiency of male to female transmission but could also be due to other biological factors. HTLV-1 has been detected in cervical secretions and semen, but higher lymphocyte counts may be present in the semen enhancing transmission. Transfusion of cellular blood products from a person with HTLV-1 infection carries a high risk of transmission, as does solid organ transplantation. However, transfusion of cell-free plasma carries a low or no risk of transmission. Also, needle sharing in the context of intravenous drug use is an important mode of transmission.
HTLV can be transmitted through needle sharing, which poses a significant risk for spreading the infection. Sharing needles is a common route of transmission for HTLV, especially among intravenous drug users. To reduce the risk of HTLV transmission, it is crucial to avoid sharing needles and practice safe injection practices.
Diagnosing HTLV-1 can be challenging due to the length of time between contracting the virus and the appearance of detectable antibodies. The diagnosis of HTLV infection is usually made by testing for HTLV antibodies in blood samples using enzyme-linked immunoassay. No single test can provide a definitive HTLV diagnosis. A combination of tests is needed. The second test may detect antibodies to different HTLV proteins or may detect proviral DNA integrated into the host cell genome ). This combined approach is important to confirm HTLV infection. NAT detects or quantifies HTLV-1 proviral DNA integrated into the host cell genome. Cell free virus is rarely found in plasma of people living with the virus. Therefore, detection of HTLV-1 RNA is not used for diagnostics.
Most people with HTLV-1 infection do not have symptoms. About 5–10% of people with HTLV-1 will develop a recognized associated clinical condition. Early clinical manifestations may be uveitis, dermatitis and pneumonitis. HTLV-1 can cause a form of blood cancer called adult T-cell leukemia or lymphoma. People may present with lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, hypercalcaemia through involvement of the skin, lung, bones and other organs.
HTLV-1 can also cause a progressive disease of the nervous system called either HTLV-1 associated myelopathy or tropical spastic paraparesis . This is a chronic inflammatory disease of the central nervous system, characterized by progressive spastic weakness of the lower limbs, lower back pain and bowel and bladder dysfunction. Clinical findings can include muscle weakness, hyperreflexia and clonus in the lower limbs, along with extensor plantar response and a spastic gait. The lifetime risk among people with HTLV-1 infection of developing ATL is estimated at 5% and of HAM or TSP at 2%. Public health strategies and interventions that could prevent HTLV-1 transmission include:
It is important to increase public awareness to support these interventions and to ensure diagnostic capacity is available in high-prevalence settings to screen and diagnose people living with HTLV.
There is currently no vaccine for HTLV-1, although development of a vaccine is considered feasible. No candidate HTLV-1 vaccine has proceeded to a clinical trial with an efficacy endpoint so far.
There is currently no treatment for HTLV-1 infection. Treatment focuses on managing associated conditions and includes corticosteroids, immune modulating drugs and chemotherapy.
In collaboration with Member States and partners, WHO works to develop guidance on HTLV-1 surveillance methods, including methods to determine prevalence and methods for monitoring interventions. This includes rapid assessment methods and burden of disease estimates. Specific guidance is also needed for low-resource settings on testing approaches and strategies for HTLV-1 detection that are appropriate to the setting and the purpose.
Further testing and analysis will determine whether there is a level of proviral load below which transmission risk is negligible, as well as specific data to better define the risk of mother-to-child HTLV-1 transmission and the effectiveness of prevention strategies. Related
News

========================================
immunization-coverage
========================================
While immunization is one of the most successful public health interventions, coverage plateaued in the decade prior to COVID-19. The COVID-19 pandemic, associated disruptions, and vaccination efforts strained health systems in 2020 and 2021, resulting in dramatic setbacks. Data from 2023 show that performance has not yet returned to 2019 levels.
During 2023, about 84% of infants worldwide received 3 doses of diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis vaccine, protecting them against infectious diseases that can cause serious illness and disability or be fatal. However, these global figures hide significant disparity among countries of different income strata, with low-income countries lagging behind.
Measles, because of its high transmissibility, acts as an early warning system, quickly exposing immunity gaps in the population. Still, 22.2 million children missed their routine first dose of measles, far from the 2019 level of 19.3 million.
A summary of global vaccination coverage in 2023 follows.
Haemophilus influenzae type b causes meningitis and pneumonia. The Hib vaccine had been introduced in 193 Member States by the end of 2023. Global coverage with 3 doses of Hib vaccine is estimated at 77%. There is great variation between regions. The WHO European Region is estimated to have 94% coverage, while it is only 33% in the WHO Western Pacific Region.
Hepatitis B is a viral infection that attacks the liver. Hepatitis B vaccine for infants had been introduced nationwide in 190 Member States by the end of 2023. Global coverage with 3 doses of hepatitis B vaccine is estimated at 83%. In addition, 117 Member States introduced 1 dose of hepatitis B vaccine nationwide to newborns within the first 24 hours of life. Global coverage is 45% and is as high as 79% in the WHO Western Pacific Region, while it is estimated at only 17% in the WHO African Region.
Human papillomavirus is the most common viral infection of the reproductive tract and can cause cervical cancer in women, other types of cancer, and genital warts in both men and women. One hundred forty-three Member States provided the HPV vaccine in their national immunization schedule and services by the end of 2023, including 13 new introductions. In 2023, 37 countries – representing more than 45% of girls aged 9–14 years old vaccinated in that year – used a 1-dose schedule. Global coverage with the first dose of HPV among girls is now estimated at 27%. While far from the 90% target by 2030, it represents a large increase from 20% in 2022 and was driven by new introductions in several large countries and further improvements in existing programmes, including in countries using the 1-dose schedule.
Bacterial meningitis is an infection that is often deadly and leaves 1 in 5 individuals with long-term devastating sequelae after the acute infection. Before the introduction of MenAfriVac in 2010 – a revolutionary vaccine – Neisseria meningitidis serogroup A accounted for 80–85% of meningitis epidemics in the African meningitis belt. By the end of 2023, more than 350 million people in 24 out of the 26 countries in the meningitis belt had been vaccinated with MenAfriVac through campaigns and 15 countries had included MenAfriVac in their routine immunization schedule. In the 26 countries of the meningitis belt, coverage is estimated at 29% in 2023. No case of NmA meningitis has been confirmed since 2017 in the meningitis belt.
Measles is a highly contagious disease caused by a virus, which usually results in a high fever and rash, and can lead to blindness, encephalitis or death. By the end of 2023, 83% of children had received 1 dose of measles-containing vaccine by their second birthday, and 74% of children received 2 doses of measles vaccine. By the end of 2023, 190 Member States had included a second dose of measles vaccine in their national immunization schedules.
Mumps is a highly contagious virus that causes painful swelling at the side of the face under the ears , fever, headache and muscle aches. It can lead to viral meningitis. Mumps vaccine had been introduced nationwide in 124 Member States by the end of 2023.
Pneumococcal diseases include pneumonia, meningitis and febrile bacteraemia, as well as otitis media, sinusitis and bronchitis. Pneumococcal vaccine had been introduced in 159 Member States by the end of 2023 and global third dose coverage was estimated at 65%. There is great variation between regions. The WHO European Region is estimated to have 86% coverage, while it is only 26% in the WHO Western Pacific Region.
Polio is a highly infectious viral disease that can cause irreversible paralysis. In 2023, 83% of infants around the world received 3 doses of polio vaccine. In 2023, the coverage of infants receiving their first dose of inactivated polio vaccine in countries that are still using oral polio vaccine is estimated at 83% as well. In these same countries, the coverage of infants receiving their second dose of IPV is estimated at 42%. There is great variation between regions. The WHO European Region is estimated to have 89% coverage, while it is only 6% in the WHO South-East Asia Region. Targeted for global eradication, polio has been stopped in all countries except for Afghanistan and Pakistan. Until poliovirus transmission is interrupted in these countries, all countries remain at risk of importation of polio, especially vulnerable countries with weak public health and immunization services and travel or trade links to endemic countries.
Rotaviruses are the most common cause of severe diarrhoeal disease in young children throughout the world. Rotavirus vaccine was introduced in 123 countries by the end of 2023. Global coverage was estimated at 55%.
Rubella is a viral disease which is usually mild in children, but infection during early pregnancy may cause fetal death or congenital rubella syndrome, which can lead to defects of the brain, heart, eyes and ears. Rubella vaccine was introduced nationwide in 175 Member States by the end of 2023, and global coverage was estimated at 71%.
Tetanus is caused by a bacterium which grows in the absence of oxygen, for example in dirty wounds or the umbilical cord if it is not kept clean. The spores of C. tetani are present in the environment irrespective of geographical location. It produces a toxin which can cause serious complications or death. Maternal and neonatal tetanus persist as public health problems in 10 countries, mainly in Africa and Asia.
Yellow fever is an acute viral haemorrhagic disease transmitted by infected mosquitoes. As of 2023, yellow fever vaccine had been introduced in routine infant immunization programmes in 37 of the 42 countries and territories at risk for yellow fever in Africa and the Americas. In these 42 countries and territories, coverage is estimated at 50%.
In 2023, 14.5 million infants did not receive an initial dose of DTP vaccine, pointing to a lack of access to immunization and other health services, and an additional 6.5 million are partially vaccinated. Of the 21 million, just under 60% of these children live in 10 countries: Afghanistan, Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, India, Indonesia, Nigeria, Pakistan, Sudan and Yemen.
Monitoring data at subnational levels is critical to helping countries prioritize and tailor vaccination strategies and operational plans to address immunization gaps and reach every person with life-saving vaccines.
WHO is working with countries and partners to improve global vaccination coverage, including through these initiatives adopted by the World Health Assembly in August 2020.
IA2030 sets an ambitious, overarching global vision and strategy for vaccines and immunization for the decade 2021–2030. It was co-created with thousands of contributions from countries and organizations around the world. It draws on lessons from the past decade and acknowledges continuing and new challenges posed by infectious diseases .
The strategy has been designed to respond to the interests of every country and intends to inspire and align the activities of community, national, regional and global stakeholders towards achieving a world where everyone, everywhere fully benefits from vaccines for good health and well-being. IA2030 is operationalized through regional and national strategies and mechanisms to ensure ownership and accountability and a monitoring and evaluation framework to guide country implementation.
In 2020, the World Health Assembly adopted the global strategy towards eliminating cervical cancer. In this strategy, the first of the 3 pillars require the introduction of the HPV vaccine in all countries and has set a target of reaching 90% coverage. With introduction currently in 74% of Member States, large investments towards introduction in low- and middle-income countries will be required in the next 10 years as well as programme improvements to reach the 90% coverage targets in low- and high-income settings alike will be required to reach the 2030 targets.
Related
News
Feature stories
More
Questions and answers – What is vaccination? Questions and answers – What is vaccination?

========================================
infant-and-young-child-feeding
========================================
Optimal breastfeeding is so critical that it could save the lives of over 820 000 children under the age of 5 years each year. WHO and UNICEF recommend:
However, many infants and children do not receive optimal feeding. For example, only about 44% of infants aged 0–6 months worldwide were exclusively breastfed over the period of 2015-2020.
Recommendations have been refined to also address the needs for infants born to HIV-infected mothers. Antiretroviral drugs now allow these children to exclusively breastfeed until they are 6 months old and continue breastfeeding until at least 12 months of age with a significantly reduced risk of HIV transmission.
Exclusive breastfeeding for 6 months has many benefits for the infant and mother. Chief among these is protection against gastrointestinal infections which is observed not only in developing but also industrialized countries. Early initiation of breastfeeding, within 1 hour of birth, protects the newborn from acquiring infections and reduces newborn mortality. The risk of mortality due to diarrhoea and other infections can increase in infants who are either partially breastfed or not breastfed at all.
Breast-milk is also an important source of energy and nutrients in children aged 6–23 months. It can provide half or more of a child’s energy needs between the ages of 6 and 12 months, and one third of energy needs between 12 and 24 months. Breast milk is also a critical source of energy and nutrients during illness, and reduces mortality among children who are malnourished.
Children and adolescents who were breastfed as babies are less likely to be overweight or obese. Additionally, they perform better on intelligence tests and have higher school attendance. Breastfeeding is associated with higher income in adult life. Improving child development and reducing health costs results in economic gains for individual families as well as at the national level.(1)
Longer durations of breastfeeding also contribute to the health and well-being of mothers: it reduces the risk of ovarian and breast cancer and helps space pregnancies–exclusive breastfeeding of babies under 6 months has a hormonal effect which often induces a lack of menstruation. This is a natural method of birth control known as the Lactation Amenorrhoea Method.
Mothers and families need to be supported for their children to be optimally breastfed. Actions that help protect, promote and support breastfeeding include:
Breastfeeding practices are highly responsive to supportive interventions, and the prevalence of exclusive and continued breastfeeding can be improved over the course of a few years. Around the age of 6 months, an infant’s need for energy and nutrients starts to exceed what is provided by breast milk, and complementary foods are necessary to meet those needs. An infant of this age is also developmentally ready for other foods. If complementary foods are not introduced around the age of 6 months, or if they are given inappropriately, an infant’s growth may falter. Guiding principles for appropriate complementary feeding are:
Families and children in difficult circumstances require special attention and practical support. Wherever possible, mothers and babies should remain together and get the support they need to exercise the most appropriate feeding option available. Breastfeeding remains the preferred mode of infant feeding in almost all difficult situations, for instance:
Breastfeeding, and especially early and exclusive breastfeeding, is one of the most significant ways to improve infant survival rates. While HIV can pass from a mother to her child during pregnancy, labour or delivery, and also through breast-milk, the evidence on HIV and infant feeding shows that giving antiretroviral treatment to mothers living with HIV significantly reduces the risk of transmission through breastfeeding and also improves her health.
WHO now recommends that all people living with HIV, including pregnant women and lactating mothers living with HIV, take ART for life from when they first learn their infection status.
Mothers living in settings where morbidity and mortality due to diarrhoea, pneumonia and malnutrition are prevalent and national health authorities endorse breastfeeding should exclusively breastfeed their babies for 6 months, then introduce appropriate complementary foods and continue breastfeeding up to at least the child’s first birthday.
WHO is committed to supporting countries with implementation and monitoring of the "Comprehensive implementation plan on maternal, infant and young child nutrition", endorsed by Member States in May 2012. The plan includes 6 targets, one of which is to increase, by 2025, the rate of exclusive breastfeeding for the first 6 months up to at least 50%. Activities that will help to achieve this include those outlined in the "Global strategy for infant and young child feeding", which aims to protect, promote and support appropriate infant and young child feeding.
UNICEF and WHO created the Global Breastfeeding Collective to rally political, legal, financial, and public support for breastfeeding. The Collective brings together implementers and donors from governments, philanthropies, international organizations, and civil society. The Collective’s vision is a world in which all mothers have the technical, financial, emotional, and public support they need to breastfeed.
WHO has formed the Network for Global Monitoring and Support for Implementation of the International Code of Marketing of Breast-milk Substitutes and Subsequent Relevant World Health Assembly Resolutions, also known as NetCode. The goal of NetCode is to protect and promote breastfeeding by ensuring that breastmilk substitutes are not marketed inappropriately. Specifically, NetCode is building the capacity of Member States and civil society to strengthen national Code legislation, continuously monitor adherence to the Code, and take action to stop all violations.
In addition, WHO and UNICEF have developed courses for training health workers to provide skilled support to breastfeeding mothers, help them overcome problems, and monitor the growth of children, so they can identify early the risk of undernutrition or overweight/obesity.
WHO provides simple, coherent and feasible guidance to countries for promoting and supporting improved infant feeding by HIV-infected mothers to prevent mother-to-child transmission, good nutrition of the baby, and protect the health of the mother.
(1) Reference:The Lancet Breastfeeding Series papersdata-sf-ec-immutable="">Breastfeeding in the 21st century: epidemiology, mechanisms, and lifelong effect.http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(15)01024-7/abstractVictora, Cesar G et al. The Lancet , Volume 387 , Issue 10017 , 475 – 490.Why invest, and what it will take to improve breastfeeding practices?http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(15)01044-2/abstractRollins, Nigel C et al. The Lancet , Volume 387 , Issue 10017 , 491 – 504 Related
News
Feature stories
Events
More
InfographicsGlobal nutrition targets 2025 - breastfeedingTen steps to successful breastfeeding

========================================
infertility
========================================
Infertility is a disease of the male or female reproductive system defined by the failure to achieve a pregnancy after 12 months or more of regular unprotected sexual intercourse. Infertility may occur due to male, female or unexplained factors. Some causes of infertility are preventable. Treatment of infertility often involves in-vitro fertilization and other types of medically assisted reproduction.
Infertility may be caused by a number of different factors, in either the male or female reproductive systems. However, it is sometimes not possible to explain the causes of infertility.
In the female reproductive system, infertility may be caused by:
The relative importance of these causes of female infertility may differ from country to country, for example due to differences in the background prevalence of STIs, or differing ages of populations studied.
In the male reproductive system, infertility may be caused by:
Lifestyle factors such as smoking, excessive alcohol intake and obesity can affect fertility. In addition, exposure to environmental pollutants and toxins can be directly toxic to gametes , resulting in their decreased numbers and poor quality .
Every human being has a right to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health. Individuals and couples have the right to decide the number, timing and spacing of their children. Infertility can negate the realization of these essential human rights (3).
A wide variety of people, including heterosexual couples, same-sex partners, older persons, individuals who are not in sexual relationships and those with certain medical conditions, such as some HIV sero-discordant couples and cancer survivors, may require infertility management and fertility care services. Inequities and disparities in access to fertility care services adversely affect the poor, unmarried, uneducated, unemployed and other marginalized populations.
Addressing infertility can also mitigate gender inequality. Although both women and men can experience infertility, women in a relationship with a man are often perceived to suffer from infertility, regardless of whether they are infertile or not. Infertility has significant negative social impacts on the lives of infertile couples and particularly women, who frequently experience violence, divorce, social stigma, emotional stress, depression, anxiety and low self-esteem. In some settings, fear of infertility can deter women and men from using contraception if they feel socially pressured to prove their fertility at an early age because of a high social value of childbearing. In such situations, education and awareness-raising interventions to address understanding of the prevalence and determinants of fertility and infertility is essential.
Availability, access, and quality of interventions to address infertility remain a challenge in most countries. Diagnosis and treatment of infertility is often not prioritized in national population and development policies and reproductive health strategies and are rarely covered through public health financing. Moreover, a lack of trained personnel and the necessary equipment and infrastructure, and the currently high costs of treatment medicines, are major barriers even for countries that are actively addressing the needs of people with infertility.
While assisted reproduction technologies have been available for more than three decades, with millions of children born worldwide from ART interventions such as in vitro fertilization , these technologies are still largely unavailable, inaccessible and unaffordable in many parts of the world, particularly in low and middle-income countries . Government policies could mitigate the many inequities in access to safe and effective fertility care. To effectively address infertility, health policies need to recognize that infertility is a disease that can often be prevented, thereby mitigating the need for costly and poorly accessible treatments. Incorporating fertility awareness in national comprehensive sexuality education programmes, promoting healthy lifestyles to reduce behavioural risks, including prevention, diagnosis and early treatment of STIs, preventing complications of unsafe abortion, postpartum sepsis and abdominal/pelvic surgery, and addressing environmental toxins associated with infertility, are policy and programmatic interventions that all governments can implement.
In addition, enabling laws and policies that regulate third party reproduction and ART are essential to ensure universal access without discrimination and to protect and promote the human rights of all parties involved. Once fertility policies are in place, it is essential to ensure that their implementation is monitored, and the quality of services is continually improved.
WHO recognizes that the provision of high-quality services for family-planning, including fertility care services, is one of the core elements of reproductive health. Recognizing the importance and impact of infertility on people’s quality of life and well-being, WHO is committed to addressing infertility and fertility care by:
References
Related
Infertility Prevalence Estimates, 1990–2021
Fact sheets

========================================
injuries-and-violence
========================================
Injuries result from road traffic crashes, falls, drowning, burns, poisoning and acts of violence against oneself or others, among other causes. Of the 4.4 million injury-related deaths, unintentional injuries take the lives of 3.16 million people every year and violence-related injuries kill 1.25 million people every year. Roughly 1 in 3 of these deaths result from road traffic crashes, 1 in 6 from suicide, 1 in 10 from homicide and 1 in 61 from war and conflict.
For people age 5-29 years, 3 of the top 5 causes of death are injury-related, namely road traffic injuries, homicide and suicide. Drowning is the sixth leading cause of death for children age 5-14 years. Falls account for over 684,000 deaths each year and are a growing and under-recognized public health issue. Tens of millions more people suffer non-fatal injuries each year which lead to emergency department and acute care visits, hospitalizations or treatment by general practitioners and often result in temporary or permanent disability and the need for long-term physical and mental health care and rehabilitation. For example, there has been a significant rise in road traffic injuries in the African region since 2000, with an almost 50% increase in healthy life-years lost. Beyond death and injury, exposure to any form of trauma, particularly in childhood, can increase the risk of mental illness and suicide; smoking, alcohol and substance abuse; chronic diseases like heart disease, diabetes and cancer; and social problems such as poverty, crime and violence. For these reasons, preventing injuries and violence, including by breaking intergenerational cycles of violence, goes beyond avoiding the physical injury to contributing to substantial health, social and economic gains.
Injuries and violence are a significant cause of death and burden of disease in all countries; however, they are not evenly distributed across or within countries – some people are more vulnerable than others depending on the conditions in which they are born, grow, work, live and age. For instance, in general, being young, male and of low socioeconomic status all increase the risk of injury and of being a victim or perpetrator of serious physical violence. The risk of fall-related injuries increases with age.
Twice as many males than females are killed each year as a result of injuries and violence. Worldwide, about three quarters of deaths from road traffic injuries, four fifths of deaths from homicide, and two thirds of deaths from war are among men. In many low- and middle-income countries, however, women and girls are more likely to be burned than men and boys, in large part due to exposure to unsafe cooking arrangements and energy poverty. Across all ages, the three leading causes of death from injuries for males are road traffic injuries, homicide and suicide, while for females they are road traffic injuries, falls and suicide. Poverty also increases the risk of injury and violence. About 90% of injury-related deaths occur in low- and middle-income countries. Across the world, injury death rates are higher in low-income countries than in high-income countries. Even within countries, people from poorer economic backgrounds have higher rates of fatal and non-fatal injuries than people from wealthier economic backgrounds. This holds true even in high-income countries.
The uneven distribution of injuries that makes them more prevalent among the less advantaged is related to several risk factors. These include living, working, travelling and going to school in more precarious conditions, less focus on prevention efforts in underprivileged communities, and poorer access to quality emergency trauma care and rehabilitation services. These issues are explained in more detail below. Risk factors and determinants common to all types of injuries include alcohol or substance use; inadequate adult supervision of children; and broad societal determinants of health such as poverty; economic and gender inequality; unemployment; a lack of safety in the built environment, including unsafe housing, schools, roads and workplaces; inadequate product safety standards and regulations; easy access to alcohol, drugs, firearms, knives and pesticides; weak social safety nets; frail criminal justice systems; and inadequate institutional policies to address injuries in a consistent and effective manner, in part due to the availability of sufficient resources. In settings where emergency trauma care services are weak or there is inequitable access to services, the consequences of injuries and violence can be exacerbated. Injuries and violence are predictable and there is compelling scientific evidence for what works to prevent injuries and violence and to treat their consequences in various settings. This evidence has been collated into technical documents that can serve as a guide to support decisions for scaling up injury and violence prevention efforts – see: Analysis of the costs and benefits for several selected injury and violence prevention measures shows that they offer significant value for money, making investment in such measures of great societal benefit. For example, with regard to child injury prevention, a study found that every US$ 1 invested in smoke detectors saves US$ 65, in child restraints and bicycle helmets saves US$ 29, and in-home visitation saves US$ 6 in medical costs, loss productivity and property loss. In Bangladesh, teaching school-age children swimming and rescue skills returned US$ 3000 per death averted. The social benefits of injuries prevented through home modification to prevent falls have been estimated to be at least six times the cost of intervention. It is estimated that in Europe and North America, a 10% reduction in adverse childhood experiences could equate to annual savings of 3 million Disability Adjusted Life Years or US$ 105 billion. For all injuries and violence, providing quality emergency care for victims can prevent fatalities, reduce the amount of short-term and long-term disability, and help those affected to cope physically, emotionally, financially and legally with the impact of the injury or violence on their lives. As such, improving the organization, planning and access to trauma care systems, including telecommunications, transport to hospital, prehospital and hospital-based care, are important strategies to minimize fatalities and disabilities from injury and violence. Providing rehabilitation for people with disabilities, ensuring they have access to assistive products such as wheelchairs, and removing barriers to social and economic participation are key strategies to ensure that people who experience disability as the result of an injury or violence may continue a full and enjoyable life.
WHO supports efforts to address injuries and violence in many ways, including by:
Related
Unintentional injuries
Violence
Suicide
Emergency care
Fact sheets
More
Preventing injuries and violence: an overview

========================================
influenza-(avian-and-other-zoonotic)
========================================
There are 4 types of influenza viruses, types A, B, C and D. Influenza A and B viruses circulate and cause seasonal epidemics of disease in humans although only type A viruses can cause global pandemics based on current knowledge and understanding. Influenza A viruses are established in many animal species. The emergence of an influenza A virus, with the ability to infect people and sustain human-to-human transmission, could cause an influenza pandemic. Influenza type A viruses are classified into subtypes according to the combinations of the proteins on the surface of the virus. When animal influenza viruses infect their host species, they are named according to the host – as avian influenza viruses, swine influenza viruses, equine influenza viruses, canine influenza viruses, etc. These animal influenza viruses are distinct from human influenza viruses and do not easily transmit to and among humans. Wild aquatic birds are the primary natural reservoir for most subtypes of influenza A viruses. Avian influenza outbreaks in poultry can have immediate and severe consequences for the agricultural sector. There will be pandemics in future, but when, where and how they spread is difficult to predict. They can have significant health, economic and social consequences. An influenza pandemic will occur when an influenza virus emerges with the ability to cause sustained human-to-human transmission, and the human population has little to no immunity against the virus. With the growth of global travel, a pandemic can spread rapidly. Whether currently circulating avian, swine and other influenza viruses will result in a future pandemic is unknown. However, the diversity of zoonotic influenza viruses that have caused human infections necessitates strengthened surveillance in both animal and human populations, thorough investigation of every zoonotic infection and pandemic preparedness planning. Exposure to avian influenza viruses can lead to infection and disease in humans, ranging from mild, flu-like symptoms or eye inflammation to severe, acute respiratory disease and/or death. Disease severity will depend upon the virus causing the infection and the characteristics of the infected individual. Rarely, gastrointestinal and neurological symptoms have been reported. The case fatality rate for A(H5) and A subtype virus infections among humans is higher than that of seasonal influenza infections. Human infections with avian and other zoonotic influenza viruses, though rare, have been reported sporadically. Direct or indirect contact with infected animals represent a risk for human infection. Current zoonotic influenza viruses have not demonstrated sustained person-to-person transmission.
For avian influenza viruses, the primary risk factor for human infection appears to be exposure to infected live or dead poultry or contaminated environments, such as live bird markets. Slaughtering, defeathering, handling carcasses of infected poultry, and preparing poultry for consumption, especially in household settings, are also likely to be risk factors. There is no evidence to suggest that A(H5), A or other avian influenza viruses can be transmitted to humans through properly prepared and cooked poultry or eggs. A few influenza A human cases have been linked to consumption of dishes made with raw contaminated poultry blood.
In 1997, human infections with A viruses were reported during an outbreak in poultry in Hong Kong SAR, China. Since 2003, this virus has spread in bird populations from Asia to Europe and Africa, and to the Americas in 2021, and has become endemic in poultry populations in many countries. Outbreaks have resulted in millions of poultry infections, several hundred human cases, and many human deaths. Human cases have been reported mostly from countries in Asia, but also from countries in Africa, the Americas and Europe. In 2013, human infections with A viruses were reported for the first time in China. The virus spread in the poultry population across the country and resulted in over 1500 reported human cases and many human deaths from 2013 to 2019. No further human cases have been reported to WHO since 2019. Since 2014, sporadic human infections with avian influenza A viruses have been reported almost exclusively from China. Other avian influenza viruses have resulted in sporadic human infections. For swine influenza viruses, risk factors include close proximity to infected pigs or visiting locations where pigs are exhibited. Sporadic human infections with swine influenza viruses of the A(H1) and A(H3) subtypes have also been detected. Laboratory tests are required to diagnose human infection and testing should be done at a lab capable of safely processing and confirming zoonotic infections. The collection of appropriate specimens from suspected human cases for virus identification and the rapid and precise characterization of the virus and/or its isolate is done at specialized reference laboratories. This is essential for proper response measures.
If a person is suspected of having zoonotic influenza, the health authorities should be notified and appropriate clinical case management provided, including testing, triage, clinical assessment for disease severity classification, assessment of risk factors for severe disease, and isolation and treatment . Patients with influenza should be managed properly to prevent severe illness and death. Influenza viruses are impossible to eradicate and zoonotic infections will continue to occur. To minimize public health risk, quality surveillance in both animal and human populations, thorough investigation of every human infection and risk-based pandemic planning are essential. Public health and animal health authorities should work together and share information during investigations of human cases of zoonotic influenza.
The public should minimize contact with animals in areas known to be affected by animal influenza viruses, including farms and settings where live animals may be sold or slaughtered, and avoid contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with animal faeces. Children, older people, pregnant and postpartum women or people with suppressed immune systems should neither collect eggs nor assist with slaughtering or food preparation. The public should strictly avoid contact with sick or dead animals, including wild birds, and should report dead animals or request their removal by contacting local wildlife or veterinary authorities.
Everyone should perform hand hygiene, preferably washing their hands either with soap and running water or using alcohol hand rubs, and in all cases as frequently, thoroughly and often as possible – but especially before and after contact with animals and their environments.
Everyone should practice good food safety habits: separating raw meat from cooked or ready-to-eat foods, keeping clean and washing hands, cooking food thoroughly, and handling and storing meat properly.
Travelers to countries and people living in countries with known outbreaks of avian influenza should, if possible, avoid poultry farms, contact with animals in live poultry markets, entering areas where poultry may be slaughtered, and contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with faeces from poultry or other animals. Travelers returning from affected regions should report to local health services if respiratory symptoms suspecting zoonotic influenza virus infection. WHO continuously monitors avian and other zoonotic influenza viruses closely through its Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System . WHO, in collaboration with the World Organisation for Animal Health and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations , conducts surveillance at the human-animal interface, assesses the associated risks and coordinates response to zoonotic influenza outbreaks and other threats to public health. Twice a year, WHO consults with experts from WHO Collaborating Centres, Essential Regulatory Laboratories and other partners to review data generated by GISRS and animal health partners on influenza viruses with pandemic potential and assesses the need for additional candidate vaccine viruses for pandemic preparedness purposes.
Based on risk assessment, WHO provides guidance, develops and adjusts surveillance, preparedness and response strategies to seasonal, zoonotic and pandemic influenza, and communicates timely risk assessment outcomes and intervention recommendations with Member States to enhance preparedness and response nationally and globally. The WHO Pandemic Influenza Preparedness Framework implements a global approach to prepare for the next influenza pandemic.
Related
News
Feature stories

========================================
influenza-(seasonal)
========================================
Key facts
Seasonal influenza is an acute respiratory infection caused by influenza viruses. It is common in all parts of the world. Most people recover without treatment.
Influenza spreads easily between people when they cough or sneeze. Vaccination is the best way to prevent the disease.
Symptoms of influenza include acute onset of fever, cough, sore throat, body aches and fatigue.
Treatment should aim to relieve symptoms. People with the flu should rest and drink plenty of liquids. Most people will recover on their own within a week. Medical care may be needed in severe cases and for people with risk factors.
There are 4 types of influenza viruses, types A, B, C and D. Influenza A and B viruses circulate and cause seasonal epidemics of disease. Symptoms of influenza usually begin around 2 days after being infected by someone who has the virus. Symptoms include:
The cough can be severe and can last 2 weeks or more. Most people recover from fever and other symptoms within a week without requiring medical attention. However, influenza can cause severe illness or death, especially in people at high risk.
Influenza can worsen symptoms of other chronic diseases. In severe cases influenza can lead to pneumonia and sepsis. People with other medical issues or who have severe symptoms should seek medical care.
Hospitalization and death due to influenza occur mainly among high-risk groups. In industrialized countries most deaths associated with influenza occur among people aged 65 years or older (1). The effects of seasonal influenza epidemics in developing countries are not fully known, but research estimates that 99% of deaths in children under 5 years of age with influenza related lower respiratory tract infections are in developing countries (2). All age groups can be affected but there are groups that are more at risk than others.
Epidemics can result in high levels of worker/school absenteeism and productivity losses. Clinics and hospitals can be overwhelmed during peak illness periods. Seasonal influenza spreads easily, with rapid transmission in crowded areas including schools and nursing homes. When an infected person coughs or sneezes, droplets containing viruses are dispersed into the air and can infect persons in close proximity. The virus can also be spread by hands contaminated with influenza viruses. To prevent transmission, people should cover their mouth and nose with a tissue when coughing and wash their hands regularly.
In temperate climates, seasonal epidemics occur mainly during winter, while in tropical regions, influenza may occur throughout the year, causing outbreaks more irregularly. The time from infection to illness, known as the incubation period, is about 2 days, but ranges from 1–4 days.
Most cases of human influenza are clinically diagnosed. However, during periods of low influenza activity or outside of epidemics situations, the infection of other respiratory viruses can also present as influenza-like illness , which makes the clinical differentiation of influenza from other pathogens difficult. Collection of appropriate respiratory samples and the application of a laboratory diagnostic test is required to establish a definitive diagnosis. Proper collection, storage and transport of respiratory specimens is the essential first step for laboratory detection of influenza virus infections. Laboratory confirmation is commonly performed using direct antigen detection, virus isolation, or detection of influenza-specific RNA by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction . Various guidance on the laboratory techniques is published and updated by WHO.
Rapid diagnostic tests are used in clinical settings, but they have lower sensitivity compared to RT-PCR methods and their reliability depends largely on the conditions under which they are used. Most people will recover from influenza on their own. People with severe symptoms or other medical conditions should seek medical care.
People with mild symptoms should:
People at high risk or with severe symptoms should be treated with antiviral medications as soon as possible. They include people who are: The WHO Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System monitors resistance to antivirals among circulating influenza viruses to provide timely evidence for national policies related to antiviral use. Vaccination is the best way to prevent influenza. Safe and effective vaccines have been used for more than 60 years. Immunity from vaccination goes away over time so annual vaccination is recommended to protect against influenza. The vaccine may be less effective in older people, but it will make the illness less severe and reduces the chance of complications and death. Vaccination is especially important for people at high risk of influenza complications and their carers. Annual vaccination is recommended for:
Other ways to prevent influenza: Vaccines are updated routinely with new vaccines developed that contain viruses that match those circulating. Several inactivated influenza vaccines and recombinant influenza vaccines are available in injectable form. Live attenuated influenza vaccines are available as a nasal spray. WHO, through the Global Influenza Programme and GISRS, in collaboration with other partners, continuously monitors influenza viruses and activity globally, recommends seasonal influenza vaccine compositions twice a year for the northern and southern hemisphere influenza seasons, guides countries in tropical and subtropical areas as to which formulation vaccines to use, supports decisions for timing of vaccination campaigns, and supports Member States to develop prevention and control strategies. WHO works to strengthen national, regional and global influenza response capacities including diagnostics, antiviral susceptibility monitoring, disease surveillance and outbreak response, to increase vaccine coverage among high-risk groups, and to support research and development of new therapeutics and other countermeasures. References
1. Estimates of US influenza-associated deaths made using four different methods.Thompson WW, Weintraub E, Dhankhar P, Cheng OY, Brammer L, Meltzer MI, et al. Influenza Other Respi Viruses. 2009;3:37-49 2. Global burden of respiratory infections due to seasonal influenza in young children: a systematic review and meta-analysis.Nair H, Abdullah Brooks W, Katz M et al. Lancet 2011; 378: 1917–3
Related
News
Fact sheets
Feature stories
More
Human metapneumovirus infection

========================================
lassa-fever
========================================
Lassa fever is an acute viral illness caused by Lassa virus that was first identified in 1969 in Nigeria. The virus belongs to the virus family Arenaviridae. Lassa fever is a zoonotic disease, meaning that humans become infected from contact with infected animals. The animal reservoir, or host, of Lassa virus is a rodent of the genus Mastomys, commonly known as the multimammate rat. Mastomys rats infected with Lassa virus do not become ill, but they can shed the virus in their urine and faeces.
About 80% of people who become infected with Lassa virus have no or mild symptoms. One in 5 infections result in severe disease, where the virus affects several organs such as the liver, spleen and kidneys. Because the clinical course of the disease is very variable, detection of the disease in affected patients has been difficult. When presence of the disease is confirmed in a community, early detection and prompt isolation and care of patients, good infection prevention and control practices in healthcare settings, and promoting community hygiene and rodent prevention, can prevent further spread of the disease.
Humans primarily become infected with Lassa virus either through exposure to food or household items that are contaminated with urine or faeces of infected Mastomys rat, or directly via contact with infected rats. Mastomys rats are ubiquitous to west Africa. They can be found living in and around homes, colonizing areas where food is stored and are able to live in fields or cleared forest. While Mastomys rats serve as the main reservoir, Lassa virus has been also isolated from other rodent species, suggesting their potential role as additional source of infection.
Although to a much less extent, Lassa virus may also spread between humans through direct contact with blood, urine, faeces or other bodily secretions of a person infected with Lassa fever. Person-to-person transmission may occur primarily in health-care settings, where the virus may also be spread by contaminated medical equipment, such as re-used needles. Health workers are at risk if caring for Lassa fever patients in the absence of appropriate infection prevention and control practices.
Lassa virus may persist in the semen of some males who recovered from the disease for up to few months. However, to date no transmission via exposure to infected semen had ever been documented. There is no epidemiological evidence supporting airborne spread between humans. The incubation period of Lassa fever ranges from 2–21 days. When it is symptomatic, the onset of the disease is usually gradual, starting with fever, general weakness headache and malaise. After a few days, sore throat, muscle pain, chest pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, cough and abdominal pain may follow. As the disease progresses, in severe cases facial swelling, fluid in the lung cavity, bleeding from the mouth, nose, vagina or gastrointestinal tract and low blood pressure may develop. Shock, seizures, tremor, disorientation, and coma may be seen in the later stages. Among hospitalized patients, approximately 15% die of Lassa fever disease. In fatal cases, death usually occurs within 14 days of symptom onset. During pregnancy, Lassa fever can cause high maternal and foetal mortality, especially late in pregnancy. In the third trimester, fetal death and maternal death rates can exceed 80% and 30% respectively.
Recovery can take a long time and sometimes leads to other conditions . Sudden hearing loss has been reported with varying incidence and up to 25% of recovered patients, both during acute disease and after recovery. In most circumstances hearing loss is reported to be permanent. Other sequelae including neurological signs, visual impairment, joint pain, transient hair loss and psychological disorders have been reported to a lesser extent. Therefore, patients who have recovered from Lassa fever should receive care for sequelae they may experience.
It can be difficult to clinically distinguish Lassa fever from other infectious diseases such as malaria, typhoid fever, shigellosis, yellow fever and other viral haemorrhagic fevers, especially early in the course of the disease.
Confirmation that symptoms are caused by Lassa virus infection are made using the following diagnostic methods:
Samples collected from patients are an extreme biohazard risk; laboratory testing on non-inactivated samples should be conducted under maximum biological containment conditions. All non-inactivated biological specimens should be packaged using the triple packaging system when transported nationally and internationally.
Early intensive supportive care including fluid management and treatment of specific symptoms, can improve survival chance. There is currently no antiviral drug approved for Lassa fever. The antiviral drug ribavirin has been given as treatment for Lassa fever; however, there is currently considerable uncertainties about its efficacy on the outcome of patients with Lassa fever, as well as on its optimal dosing regimens. Whenever possible, patients should be enrolled into a randomized clinical trial with ribavirin or other investigational therapeutics to assess clinical outcomes and safety. Other candidate treatment options are at several stages of development and evaluation. There is currently no licensed vaccine for Lassa fever, but several potential candidate vaccines are in development.
Prevention of Lassa fever relies on limiting contact with rodent population. Promoting good community hygiene to discourage rodents from entering homes and adapting the following measures may help: Because Mastomys are so abundant in endemic areas, it is not possible to completely eliminate them from the environment. In healthcare settings, staff should always apply standard infection prevention and control precautions when caring for patients, regardless of their presumed diagnosis. These include basic hand hygiene, respiratory hygiene, use of personal protective equipment, and safe injection practices. Healthcare workers caring for patients with suspected or confirmed Lassa fever should apply extra infection control measures to prevent contact with the patient’s blood and body fluids and contaminated surfaces or materials such as clothing and bedding. Laboratory workers are also at risk. Samples taken from humans and animals for investigation of Lassa virus infection should be handled by trained staff and processed in suitably equipped laboratories under maximum biological containment conditions.
In endemic areas, especially during the epidemic season, health workers should have a higher level of suspicion for Lassa fever in patients presenting with suggestive symptoms. Family members should always be careful to avoid contact with blood and body fluids while caring for sick persons. Patients suspected or confirmed for Lassa fever should be referred to a designated treatment center for early care. On rare occasions, travellers returning from endemic areas were confirmed for Lassa fever. Although malaria, typhoid fever and many other tropical infections are much more common, the diagnosis of Lassa fever should be considered in febrile patients returning from west Africa, especially if they have had exposures in areas where Lassa fever is known to be endemic. Healthcare workers seeing a patient suspected to have Lassa fever should immediately contact local and national experts for advice and to arrange for laboratory testing. WHO works closely with Lassa fever endemic countries and partners to support the preparedness and response to Lassa fever by supporting surveillance activities, clinical management, laboratory services, infection prevention and control measures, logistics, training and community engagement. Generation of further knowledge including for diagnostics and therapeutics, and exchange of expertise across countries and partners, is critical to contribute to the management of Lassa fever, in particular reducing associated mortality and limiting human-to-human transmission in healthcare facilities. Related
Fact sheets

========================================
low-back-pain
========================================
Low back pain describes pain between the lower edge of the ribs and the buttock. It can last for a short time , a little longer or a long time . It can affect anyone. LBP makes it hard to move and can affect quality of life and mental well-being. It can limit work activities and engagement with family and friends. LBP can be specific or non-specific. Specific LBP is pain that is caused by a certain disease or structural problem in the spine, or when the pain radiates from another part of the body. Non-specific LBP is when it isn’t possible to identify a specific disease or structural reason to explain the pain. LBP is non-specific in about 90% of cases.
In all types and at all stages of LBP, rehabilitation is essential to reassure people and help them make sense of their pain, help them return to activities they enjoy and identify strategies to support recovery and improve function. Specialized care pathways may be needed for specific LBP.
An estimated 619 million people live with LBP and it is the leading cause of disability worldwide. LBP is a major public health issue. LBP is often associated with loss of work productivity and thus produces huge economic burden on individuals and on societies. Low back pain has the highest prevalence globally among musculoskeletal conditions and is the leading cause of disability worldwide. It is the condition where the greatest number of people may benefit from rehabilitation. People at any age can experience LBP, including children and adolescents. Most people experience LBP at some point in their lives. The peak in the number of cases occurs at 50–55 years, and women experience LBP more frequently than men. The prevalence and disability impact of LBP are greatest among older people aged 80–85 years. Recurrent LBP episodes are more common with ageing.
Chronic LBP is a major cause of work loss and participation restriction and reduced quality of life around the world. Considering the high prevalence, LBP contributes to a huge economic burden on societies. It should be considered a global public health problem that requires an appropriate response.
Low back pain can be a dull ache or sharp pain. It can also cause pain to radiate into other areas of the body, especially the legs.
LBP can restrict a person’s movement, which can affect their work, school and community engagement. It can also cause problems with sleep, low mood and distress.
LPB can be acute , sub-acute or chronic . In most cases of acute LBP, symptoms go away on their own and most people will recover well. However, for some people the symptoms will continue and turn into chronic pain.
People with LBP may also experience spine-related leg pain . This is often described as a dull sensation or a sharp, electric shock feeling. Numbness or tingling and weakness in some muscles may be experienced with the leg pain.
When associated with LBP, radicular signs and symptoms are often due to involvement of a spinal nerve root. Some people may experience radicular symptoms without LBP, when a nerve is compressed or injured distal to the spinal column. All these experiences affect well-being and quality of life and often lead to loss of work and retirement wealth, particularly in those who experience chronic symptoms.
LBP may be classified as specific or non-specific. Non-specific means that the experience of pain cannot be confidently accounted for by another diagnosis such as an underlying disease, pathology or tissue damage. It is non-specific in about 90% of cases. Risk factors for non-specific LBP include low physical activity levels, smoking, obesity and high physical stress at work.
Specific LBP can be explained by an underlying disease , tissue damage , or may be referred from other organs . Treatment for LBP depends on the nature of the pain and whether it is non-specific or specific.
For specific LBP, treatments focus on treating the underlying condition causing the pain. Treatments for non-specific LBP include:
Medicines can be used to reduce the symptoms of LBP and should ideally be combined with other treatments. Painkillers should not be the first-line treatment for LBP. Older people and those with other medical conditions should speak to a healthcare provider before using medicines.
With the onset of any LBP, a comprehensive clinical assessment comprising a careful physical examination and a psychosocial assessment is essential to tailor care while considering a person’s values, preferences and care priorities. The longer a person experiences LBP, the more likely that limitations in functioning will manifest. In these contexts, adopting a biopsychosocial approach to assessment and care planning becomes increasingly important. Rehabilitation includes sets of interventions that aim to achieve and maintain independence in daily living and optimal participation in meaningful activities, such as work and community life and to achieve well-being. Interventions for rehabilitation in LBP include non-pharmacologic and pharmacologic options, whereas non-pharmacological interventions have in most cases a high priority. Self-care is an important part of managing LBP and returning to meaningful life activities. There are several ways to reduce symptoms and help prevent further episodes of non-specific low back pain:
Education and support can help people with low back pain to develop strategies to self-manage and cope with the symptoms. This helps to reduce the impact of the disease and improve well-being.
WHO is taking action to extend access to care for people with low back pain in different ways:
WHO Rehabilitation 2030 Initiative: The Package of Interventions for Rehabilitation provides information on essential interventions for rehabilitation , and human and material resources for 20 health conditions, including low back pain.
UN Decade of Healthy Ageing:
WHO recommends a reorientation of health and care systems to promote healthy ageing and address the diverse needs of older persons. The Integrated Care for Older People approach promotes the person-centred assessment of the older person to guide the design of personalized, health and social care, including long-term care interventions. Specific recommendations are provided to prevent the loss of locomotor and psychological capacity because of pain.
The WHO Guideline on management of chronic primary low back pain in adults will provide evidence-based recommendations about non-surgical care in primary and community care settings.
References
1. GBD 2021 Low Back Pain Collaborators. Global, regional, and national burden of low back pain, 1990-2020, its attributable risk factors, and projections to 2050: a systematic analysis of the Global Burden of Disease Study 2021. Lancet Rheumatol 2023: 5: e316-29.
2. GBD 2019: Global burden of 369 diseases and injuries in 204 countries and territories, 1990–2019: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019. https://vizhub.healthdata.org/gbd-results/.
Related
Fact sheets

========================================
lung-cancer
========================================
Lung cancer is a type of cancer that starts when abnormal cells grow in an uncontrolled way in the lungs. It is a serious health issue that can cause severe harm and death.
Symptoms of lung cancer include a cough that does not go away, chest pain and shortness of breath. It is important to seek medical care early to avoid serious health effects. Treatments depend on the person’s medical history and the stage of the disease. The most common types of lung cancer are non-small cell carcinoma and small cell carcinoma . NSCLC is more common and grows slowly, while SCLC is less common but often grows quickly.
Lung cancer is a significant public health concern, causing a considerable number of deaths globally. GLOBOCAN 2020 estimates of cancer incidence and mortality produced by the International Agency for Research on Cancer show as lung cancer remains the leading cause of cancer death, with an estimated 1.8 million deaths in 2020. Smoking tobacco is the primary risk factor for lung cancer but it can also affect non-smokers. Other risk factors include exposure to secondhand smoke, occupational hazards , air pollution, hereditary cancer syndromes, and previous chronic lung diseases. Lung cancer can cause several symptoms that may indicate a problem in the lungs.
The most common symptoms include: Early symptoms may be mild or dismissed as common respiratory issues, leading to delayed diagnosis.
Not smoking tobacco is the best way to prevent lung cancer. Other risk factors to avoid include:
Early treatment can prevent lung cancer from becoming worse and spreading to other parts of the body.
Prevention of lung cancer include primary and secondary prevention measures. Primary prevention aims to prevent the initial occurrence of a disease through risk reduction and promoting healthy behaviour. In public health, these preventive measures include smoking cessation, promoting smoke-free environments, implementing tobacco control policies, addressing occupational hazards, and reducing air pollution levels. Secondary prevention for lung cancer involves screening methods that aim to detect the disease in its early stages, before symptoms become apparent and can be indicated for high-risk individuals. In this population, early detection can significantly increase the chances of successful treatment and improve outcomes. The primary screening method for lung cancer is low-dose computed tomography .
Diagnostic methods for lung cancer include physical examination, imaging , examination of the inside of the lung using a bronchoscopy, taking a sample of tissue for histopathology examination and definition of the specific subtype , and molecular testing to identify specific genetic mutations or biomarkers to guide the best treatment option. Treatments for lung cancer are based on the type of cancer, how much it has spread, and the person’s medical history. Early detection of lung cancer can lead to better treatments and outcomes.
Treatments include: Surgery is often used in the early stages of lung cancer if the tumour has not spread to other areas of the body. Chemotherapy and radiation therapy can help shrink the tumour.
Doctors from several disciplines often work together to provide treatment and care of people with lung cancer.
Supportive care is important for people with lung cancer. It aims to manage symptoms, provide pain relief, and give emotional support. It can help to increase quality of life for people with lung cancer and their families.
a) Early stage disease: The primary treatment for early stage lung cancer is surgical removal of the tumour through procedures such as lobectomy, segmentectomy, or wedge resection. Neoadjuvant therapy can help reduce tumour size, making it more manageable for surgical removal. Adjuvant treatment is very often recommended after surgery to reduce the risk of cancer recurrence. In cases where surgery is not feasible, radiation therapy or stereotactic body radiation therapy may be used as the primary treatment. Targeted therapy and immunotherapy may also be considered based on specific tumour characteristics. Individualized treatment plans should be discussed with healthcare professionals.
b) Advanced disease: The treatment for metastatic stage lung cancer, where the cancer has spread to distant organs or lymph nodes, is based on various factors, including the patient's overall health, the extent and location of metastases, histology, genetic profile, and individual preferences. The primary goal is to prolong survival, alleviate symptoms, and improve quality of life. Systemic therapies, such as chemotherapy, targeted therapy, and immunotherapy, play a crucial role in the treatment of metastatic lung cancer. Chemotherapy is often the first-line treatment for the majority of patients around the world and involves the use of drugs that circulate throughout the body to kill cancer cells. Combination chemotherapy regimens are commonly used, and the choice of drugs depends on factors such as the histological type of the cancer and the patient's general health conditions. Targeted therapy, designed to block the signalling pathways that drive the growth of cancer cells, is an important option for patients with specific genetic mutations or biomarkers identified in their tumour. Immunotherapy, specifically immune checkpoint inhibitors, has revolutionized the treatment of metastatic lung cancer. These drugs help to stimulate the immune system to recognize and attack cancer cells. Local treatments, such as radiation therapy and surgery, may be used to manage specific metastatic sites or alleviate symptoms caused by tumour growth.
Clinical trials offer opportunities to access novel treatments or experimental therapies for patients. Participation in clinical trials helps advance medical knowledge and potentially offers new treatment options.
WHO recognizes the significant impact of lung cancer on global health and has implemented several initiatives to address the disease comprehensively. The WHO's response focuses on tobacco control, cancer prevention, early detection, and improving access to quality treatment and care. WHO supports countries in implementing evidence-based tobacco control policies, including increasing tobacco taxes, enforcing comprehensive bans on tobacco advertising, promotion, and sponsorship, and implementing strong graphic health warnings on tobacco products. The Organization also promotes cancer prevention strategies by advocating for healthy lifestyles, including regular physical activity, a healthy diet, and minimizing exposure to environmental risk factors. Additionally, WHO supports early detection programs and encourages countries to implement screening measures for high-risk populations to detect lung cancer at earlier stages when treatment options are more effective. Last, WHO works towards ensuring access to quality treatment and care for lung cancer patients by providing technical guidance to member states, promoting equitable access to essential cancer medicines, and fostering international collaboration to share best practices and improve cancer care outcomes.
Related
International Agency for Research on Cancer: Lung cancer
WHO's work on tobacco cessation
WHO's work on cancer
Fact sheets
More
ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines: Lung and Chest Tumours
ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines: Lung and Chest Tumours

========================================
lead-poisoning-and-health
========================================
Lead is a naturally occurring toxic metal found in the Earth’s crust. Its widespread use has caused extensive environmental contamination, human exposure and significant public health problems globally.
Important sources of environmental contamination include mining, smelting, manufacturing and recycling activities, and lead use in a range of products. Most global lead consumption is for the manufacture of lead-acid batteries for motor vehicles. Lead is used in many products, including pigments, paints, solder, stained glass, lead crystal glassware, ammunition, ceramic glazes, jewellery, toys, some traditional cosmetics, and some traditional medicines. Lead can contaminate drinking water through plumbing systems containing lead pipes, solders and fittings.
Young children are particularly vulnerable to the toxic effects of lead and can suffer permanent adverse health impacts, particularly on the development of the central nervous system. Lead causes long-term harm in adults, including increased risk of high blood pressure, cardiovascular problems and kidney damage. Lead exposure during pregnancy can cause reduced fetal growth and preterm birth.
People are exposed to lead through occupational and environmental sources. This mainly results from:
Young children are particularly vulnerable to lead poisoning as they may absorb up to 4–5 times as much lead as adults from an ingested dose. Moreover, children’s innate curiosity and their age-appropriate and frequent hand-to-mouth and object-to-mouth behaviours increase their risk of exposure to lead-contaminated dust, soil and paint. Children who engage in pica, the compulsive, habitual consumption of non-food items, are at particularly high risk. Exposure to lead-contaminated soil and dust resulting from battery recycling and mining has caused outbreaks of mass lead poisoning, including deaths in young children, in some countries.
Once lead enters the body, it is distributed to organs including the brain, kidneys, liver and bones. Lead is stored in the teeth and bones, where it accumulates over time. Lead stored in bone may be released into the blood during pregnancy and expose the fetus. Malnourished children are more susceptible to lead as they absorb more lead if other nutrients are deficient, especially calcium or iron. Lead exposure can have serious consequences for the health of children. Exposure to very high levels of lead can severely damage the brain and central nervous system causing coma, convulsions and even death. Children who survive severe lead poisoning may be left with permanent intellectual disability and behavioural disorders. At lower levels of exposure that may have no obvious symptoms, lead can lead to a spectrum of injury across multiple body systems. In particular, lead can permanently affect children’s brain development, resulting in reduced intelligence quotient (IQ), behavioural changes including reduced attention span and increased antisocial behaviour, and reduced educational attainment. Lead exposure also causes anaemia, hypertension, renal impairment, immunotoxicity and toxicity to the reproductive organs. There is no known safe blood lead concentration; even blood lead concentrations as low as 3.5 µg/dL may be associated with decreased intelligence in children, behavioural difficulties and learning problems (1).
Lead exposure causes a significant burden of disease. The Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation estimates that more than 1.5 million deaths globally were attributed to lead exposure in 2021, primarily due to cardiovascular effects (2). Additionally, lead exposure was estimated to account for more than 33 million years lost to disability worldwide in 2021 (2).
WHO identifies lead as one of 10 chemicals of major public health concern requiring action by Member States to protect the health of workers, children and women of reproductive age. WHO publishes a range of resources on lead, including information for policy-makers, technical guidance, training materials and advocacy materials. In 2021, WHO published Guidelines on clinical management exposure to lead. The guidelines recommend that for individuals with blood lead concentration equal to or greater than 5 µg/dL, the source of lead exposure should be identified, and appropriate action taken to terminate exposure.
Lead paint is a major source of exposure globally. WHO and UNEP lead the Global Alliance to Eliminate Lead Paint. It aims to encourage all countries to develop legally binding laws to control the use of lead in paint. As of January 2024, 48% of countries have legally-binding controls on lead paint.WHO is preparing guidelines on prevention of lead exposure, which will provide policy-makers, public health authorities and health professionals with evidence-based guidance on the measures to protect the health of children and adults from lead exposure.
References
Related
News
Fact sheets
Feature stories
Events

========================================
legionellosis
========================================
OverviewLegionellosis varies in severity from a mild febrile illness to a serious and sometimes fatal form of pneumonia and is caused by exposure to the Legionella bacteria species found in contaminated water and potting mixes.Cases of legionellosis are often categorized as being community, travel or hospital acquired based on the type of exposure.Worldwide, waterborne Legionella pneumophila is the most common cause of cases including outbreaks. Legionella pneumophila and related species are commonly found in lakes, rivers, creeks, hot springs and other bodies of water. Other species including L. longbeachae can be found in potting mixes. The bacterium L. pneumophila was first identified in 1977 as the cause of an outbreak of severe pneumonia in a convention centre in the USA in 1976. It has since been associated with outbreaks linked to poorly maintained artificial water systems.The infective dose is unknown but can be assumed to be low for susceptible people, as illnesses have occurred after short exposures and 3 or more kilometres from the source of outbreaks. The likelihood of illness depends on the concentrations of Legionella in the water source, the production and dissemination of aerosols, host factors such as age and pre-existing health conditions and the virulence of the particular strain of Legionella. Most infections do not cause illness.The causeThe causative agents are Legionella bacteria from water or potting mix. The most common cause of illness is the freshwater species L. pneumophila, which is found in natural aquatic environments worldwide. However, artificial water systems which provide environments conducive to the growth and dissemination of Legionella represent the most likely sources of disease. The bacteria live and grow in water systems at temperatures of 20 to 50 degrees Celsius . Legionella can survive and grow as parasites within free-living protozoa and within biofilms which develop in water systems. They can cause infections by infecting human cells using a similar mechanism to that used to infect protozoa. TransmissionThe most common form of transmission of Legionella is inhalation of contaminated aerosols from contaminated water. Sources of aerosols that have been linked with transmission of Legionella include air conditioning cooling towers, hot and cold water systems, humidifiers and whirlpool spas. Infection can also occur by aspiration of contaminated water or ice, particularly in susceptible hospital patients, and by exposure of babies during water births. To date, there has been no reported direct human-to-human transmission.Extent of the disease
Legionellosis varies in severity from a mild febrile illness to a serious and sometimes fatal form of pneumonia and is caused by exposure to the Legionella bacteria species found in contaminated water and potting mixes.
Cases of legionellosis are often categorized as being community, travel or hospital acquired based on the type of exposure.
Worldwide, waterborne Legionella pneumophila is the most common cause of cases including outbreaks. Legionella pneumophila and related species are commonly found in lakes, rivers, creeks, hot springs and other bodies of water. Other species including L. longbeachae can be found in potting mixes. The bacterium L. pneumophila was first identified in 1977 as the cause of an outbreak of severe pneumonia in a convention centre in the USA in 1976. It has since been associated with outbreaks linked to poorly maintained artificial water systems.
The infective dose is unknown but can be assumed to be low for susceptible people, as illnesses have occurred after short exposures and 3 or more kilometres from the source of outbreaks. The likelihood of illness depends on the concentrations of Legionella in the water source, the production and dissemination of aerosols, host factors such as age and pre-existing health conditions and the virulence of the particular strain of Legionella. Most infections do not cause illness.
The causative agents are Legionella bacteria from water or potting mix. The most common cause of illness is the freshwater species L. pneumophila, which is found in natural aquatic environments worldwide. However, artificial water systems which provide environments conducive to the growth and dissemination of Legionella represent the most likely sources of disease. The bacteria live and grow in water systems at temperatures of 20 to 50 degrees Celsius . Legionella can survive and grow as parasites within free-living protozoa and within biofilms which develop in water systems. They can cause infections by infecting human cells using a similar mechanism to that used to infect protozoa. The most common form of transmission of Legionella is inhalation of contaminated aerosols from contaminated water. Sources of aerosols that have been linked with transmission of Legionella include air conditioning cooling towers, hot and cold water systems, humidifiers and whirlpool spas. Infection can also occur by aspiration of contaminated water or ice, particularly in susceptible hospital patients, and by exposure of babies during water births. To date, there has been no reported direct human-to-human transmission.
Legionnaires’ disease is believed to occur worldwide.
The identified incidence of Legionnaires’ disease varies widely according to the level of surveillance and reporting. Since many countries lack appropriate methods of diagnosing the infection or sufficient surveillance systems, the rate of occurrence is unknown. In Europe, Australia and the USA there are about 10–15 cases detected per million population per year.
Of the reported cases, 75–80% are over 50 years and 60–70% are male. Other risk factors for community-acquired and travel-associated legionellosis include smoking, a history of heavy drinking, pulmonary-related illness, immuno-suppression, and chronic respiratory or renal illnesses. Risk factors for hospital-acquired pneumonia are recent surgery, intubation , mechanical ventilation, aspiration, presence of nasogastric tubes, and the use of respiratory therapy equipment. The most susceptible hosts are immuno-compromised patients, including organ transplant recipients and cancer patients and those receiving corticosteroid treatment.
Delay in diagnosis and administration of appropriate antibiotic treatment, increasing age and presence of co-existing diseases are predictors of death from Legionnaires’ disease.
Symptoms
Legionellosis is a generic term describing the pneumonic and non-pneumonic forms of infection with Legionella. The non-pneumonic form is an acute, self-limiting influenza-like illness usually lasting 2–5 days. The incubation period is from a few and up to 48 hours. The main symptoms are fever, chills, headache, malaise and muscle pain . No deaths are associated with this type of infection.
Legionnaires’ disease, the pneumonic form, has an incubation period of 2 to 10 days . Initially, symptoms are fever, loss of appetite, headache, malaise and lethargy. Some patients may also have muscle pain, diarrhoea and confusion. There is also usually an initial mild cough, but as many as 50% of patients can present phlegm. Blood-streaked phlegm or hemoptysis occurs in about one-third of the patients. The severity of disease ranges from a mild cough to a rapidly fatal pneumonia. Death occurs through progressive pneumonia with respiratory failure and/or shock and multi-organ failure.
Untreated Legionnaires’ disease usually worsens during the first week. In common with other risk factors causing severe pneumonia, the most frequent complications of legionellosis are respiratory failure, shock and acute kidney and multi-organ failure. Recovery always requires antibiotic treatment, and is usually complete, after several weeks or months. In rare occasions, severe progressive pneumonia or ineffective treatment for pneumonia can result in brain sequelae.
The death rate as a result of Legionnaires’ disease depends on the severity of the disease, the appropriateness of initial anti-microbial treatment, the setting where Legionella was acquired, and host factors . The death rate may be as high as 40–80% in untreated immuno-suppressed patients and can be reduced to 5–30% through appropriate case management and depending on the severity of the clinical signs and symptoms. Overall the death rate is usually within the range of 5–10%. Response
Treatments exist, but there is no vaccine currently available for Legionnaires’ disease.
The nonpneumonic form of infection is self-limiting and does not require medical interventions, including antibiotic treatment. Patients with Legionnaires’ disease always require antibiotic treatment following diagnosis.
The public health threat posed by legionellosis can be addressed by implementing water safety plans by authorities responsible for building safety or water system safety. These plans must be specific to the building or water system and should result in the introduction and regular monitoring of control measures against identified risks including Legionella. Although it is not always possible to eradicate the source of infection, it is possible to reduce the risks substantially.
Prevention of Legionnaires’ disease depends on applying control measures to minimize the growth of Legionella and dissemination of aerosols. These measures include good maintenance of devices, including regular cleaning and disinfection and applying other physical or chemical measures to minimize growth. Some examples are: Applying such controls will greatly reduce the risk of Legionella contamination and prevent the occurrence of sporadic cases and outbreaks. Extra precautions may be required for water and ice provided to highly susceptible patients in hospitals including those at risk of aspiration (for example, ice machines can be a source of Legionella and should not be used by highly susceptible patients).
Control and prevention measures must be accompanied by proper vigilance on the part of general practitioners and community health services for the detection of cases. WHO makes available technical resources to support the management and control of legionellosis and advises Member States when specific queries are raised.
Related
Documents
More
PublicationsLegionella and the prevention of legionellosisWater and healthWater safety in distribution systemsWater safety in buildings

========================================
leishmaniasis
========================================
Leishmaniasis is caused by a protozoa parasite from over 20 Leishmania species. Over 90 sandfly species are known to transmit Leishmania parasites. There are 3 main forms of the disease:
Leishmania parasites are transmitted through the bites of infected female phlebotomine sandflies, which feed on blood to produce eggs. Some 70 animal species, including humans, can be the source of Leishmania parasites.
Cutaneous Leishmaniasis is highly endemic in Algeria whereas in west Africa the epidemiological information is scarce. In east Africa all forms are endemic with outbreaks of visceral leishmaniasis occurring frequently. Cutaneous leishmaniasis is the main form and the epidemiology is complex, with several animals being the source of the parasite, and numerous types of sandflies and multiple Leishmania species in the same geographical area. Brazil is the main country endemic for VL in that region.
This region accounts for 80% of the cutaneous leishmaniasis cases reported worldwide. Visceral leishmaniasis is highly endemic in Iraq, Somalia, Sudan and Yemen.
Cutaneous and visceral leishmaniasis are endemic. Imported cases are common, coming mainly from Africa and the Americas.
Visceral leishmaniasis is the main form of the disease, which is also endemic for cutaneous leishmaniasis. Post-kala-azar dermal leishmaniasis is usually a sequel of visceral leishmaniasis that appears as macular, papular or nodular rash usually on face, upper arms and trunk. It occurs in east Africa and on the Indian subcontinent, where 5–10% of patients with kala-azar are reported to develop the condition. Although uncommon, it has also been reported from Brazil and also in HIV coinfected VL cases caused by L. infantum. It usually appears 6 months to 1 or more years after kala-azar has apparently been cured but can occur earlier. People with PKDL are considered a potential source of Leishmania infection.
People living with HIV and who are infected with leishmaniasis have high chances of developing the full-blown disease, high relapse and mortality rates. Antiretroviral treatment reduces the development of the disease, delays relapses and increases the survival. As of 2021, Leishmania-HIV coinfection has been reported from 45 countries. High coinfection rates are reported from Brazil, Ethiopia and the state of Bihar . In 2022, WHO published new treatment recommendations for Leishmania-HIV coinfected patients in east Africa and South-East Asia. Poverty increases the risk for leishmaniasis. Poor housing and domestic sanitary conditions may increase sandfly breeding and resting sites, as well as their access to humans. Sandflies are attracted to crowded housing because it is easier to bite people and feed on their blood. Human behaviour, such as sleeping outside or on the ground, may increase risk.
Diets lacking protein-energy, iron, vitamin A and zinc increase the risk that an infection will progress to a full-blown disease.
Epidemics of leishmaniasis often occur when many people who are not immune move into areas where the transmission is high. The incidence of leishmaniasis can be affected by changes in urbanization, deforestation or the human incursion into forested areas.
Climate change is affecting the spread of leishmaniasis though changes in temperature and rainfall, which affect the size and geographic distribution of sandfly populations. Drought, famine and flood also cause migration of people into areas where the transmission of the parasite is high.
People suspected of suffering from visceral leishmaniasis should seek medical care immediately. In visceral leishmaniasis, diagnosis is made by combining clinical signs with parasitological or serological tests . In cutaneous and mucocutaneous leishmaniasis serological tests have limited value and clinical manifestation with parasitological tests confirms the diagnosis.
The treatment of leishmaniasis depends on several factors including type of disease, concomitant pathologies, parasite species and geographic location. Leishmaniasis is a treatable and curable disease, which requires an immunocompetent system because medicines will not get rid of the parasite from the body, thus the risk of relapse if immunosuppression occurs. All patients diagnosed with visceral leishmaniasis require prompt and complete treatment. Detailed information on the treatment is available in the WHO technical report series 949, Control of leishmaniasis and the latest guidelines published on HIV-VL in east Africa and South-East Asia and the guideline for the treatment of leishmaniasis in the Americas. Preventing and controlling the spread of leishmaniasis is complex and requires many tools. Key strategies include:
WHO's work on leishmaniasis control involves:
Related
News
Fact sheets

========================================
leprosy
========================================
Leprosy, also known as Hansen disease, is a chronic infectious disease caused mainly by a type of bacteria called Mycobacterium leprae. The disease affects the skin, the peripheral nerves, the mucosa of the upper respiratory tract and the eyes. Apart from the physical deformity, persons affected by leprosy also face stigmatization and discrimination. However, leprosy is curable and treatment in the early stages can prevent disability.
Leprosy is a neglected tropical disease which still occurs in more than 120 countries, with around 200 000 new cases reported every year. Elimination of leprosy as a public health problem (defined as prevalence of less than 1 per 10 000 population as per World Health Assembly resolution 44.9) was achieved globally in the year 2000 and in most countries by the year 2010.
The reduction in the number of new cases has been gradual. As per data of 2023, Brazil, India and Indonesia continue to report more than 10 000 new cases, while 12 other countries (Bangladesh, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, Madagascar, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Nigeria, Philippines, Somalia, Sri Lanka and the United Republic of Tanzania) each reported 1000–10 000 new cases. Fifty-six countries reported 0 cases and 112 reported fewer than 1000 new cases.
Detailed information on 2023 annual statistics can be accessed in the Weekly Epidemiological Record, 13 September 2024, vol. 99.
The disease is believed to be transmitted through droplets from the nose and mouth of an untreated case of leprosy, containing the causative agent, following prolonged, close contact. The disease does not spread through casual contact . The patient stops transmitting the disease upon initiation of treatment.
The diagnosis of leprosy is done clinically. Laboratory-based services may be required in cases that are difficult to diagnose. The disease manifests commonly through skin lesion and peripheral nerve involvement. Leprosy is diagnosed by finding at least one of the following cardinal signs: (i) definite loss of sensation in a pale or reddish skin patch; (ii) thickened or enlarged peripheral nerve, with loss of sensation and/or weakness of the muscles supplied by that nerve; microscopic detection of bacilli in a slit-skin smear.
Based on the above, cases of leprosy are classified into two types for treatment purposes: a paucibacillary (PB) case and multibacillary (MB) case.
Leprosy is a curable disease. The currently recommended treatment regimen consists of three medicines and is referred to as multi-drug therapy . The same regimen with a duration of 6 months for PB and 12 months for MB cases has been recommended by WHO. MDT kills the pathogen and cures the patient. Early diagnosis and prompt treatment can help to prevent disabilities. WHO has been providing MDT free of cost. Free MDT was initially funded by The Nippon Foundation and has been donated by Novartis since 2000.
Case detection and treatment with MDT alone have proven insufficient to interrupt transmission. WHO recommends contact tracing , accompanied by the administration of a single dose of rifampicin as post-exposure prophylaxis .
WHO provides technical support to countries and territories on leprosy prevention and control. Every year, WHO collates epidemiological data on leprosy from countries and territories and publishes a consolidated report in English and French in the Weekly Epidemiological Record.
After detailed consultations with countries, experts, partners and persons affected by leprosy, WHO released the Towards zero leprosy: global leprosy strategy 2021–2030 aligned to the Neglected tropical diseases road map 2021–2030. The Strategy envisions zero leprosy: zero infection and disease, zero disability, zero stigma and discrimination. The four strategic pillars of the Strategy include: implementing integrated, country-owned zero leprosy roadmaps in all endemic countries; scaling up leprosy prevention alongside integrated active case detection; managing leprosy and its complications and prevent new disability; and combatting stigma and ensuring human rights are respected. The Strategy also recognizes the need for investment in research and includes a set of key research priorities.
WHO has developed e-learning modules that aim to enhance knowledge and skills of health workers at all levels on topics related to diagnosis, treatment of leprosy and management of disabilities. These can be accessed through the WHO Academy.
Related
News
Fact sheets

========================================
listeriosis
========================================
Foodborne listeriosis is one of the most serious and severe foodborne diseases. It is caused by the bacteria Listeria monocytogenes. It is a relatively rare disease with 0.1 to 10 cases per 1 million people per year depending on the countries and regions of the world. Although the number of cases of listeriosis is small, the high rate of death associated with this infection makes it a significant public health concern.
Unlike many other common foodborne diseases causing bacteria, L. monocytogenescan survive and multiply at low temperatures usually found in refrigerators. Eating contaminated food with high numbers of L. monocytogenes is the main route of infection. Infection can also be transmitted between humans, notably from pregnant women to unborn babies.
L. monocytogenes are ubiquitous in nature and found in soil, water and animal digestive tracts. Vegetables may be contaminated through soil or the use of manure as fertilizer. Ready-to-eat food can also become contaminated during processing and the bacteria can multiply to dangerous levels during distribution and storage.
Food most often associated with listeriosis include:
In past outbreaks, foods involved included ready-to-eat meat products, such as frankfurters, meat spread , smoked salmon and fermented raw meat sausages, as well as dairy products and prepared salads as well as fresh vegetables and fruits.
Listeriosis is a series of diseases caused by the bacteria L. monocytogenes, outbreaks of which occur in all countries. There are two main types of listeriosis: a non-invasive form and an invasive form.
Noninvasive listeriosis is a mild form of the disease affecting mainly otherwise healthy people. Symptoms include diarrhoea, fever, headache and myalgia . The incubation period is short . Outbreaks of this disease have generally involved the ingestion of foods containing high doses of L. monocytogenes.
Invasive listeriosis is a more severe form of the disease and affects certain high risk groups of the population. These include pregnant women, patients undergoing treatment for cancer, HIV and organ transplants, elderly people and infants. This form of disease is characterized by severe symptoms and a high mortality rate . The symptoms include fever, myalgia , septicemia, meningitis. The incubation period is usually one to two weeks but can vary between a few days and up to 90 days.
The initial diagnosis of listeriosis is made based on clinical symptoms and detection of the bacteria in a smear from blood, cerebrospinal fluid , meconium of newborns , as well as from faeces, vomitus, foods or animal feed. Various detection methods, including polymerase chain reaction , are available for diagnosis of listeriosis in humans. During pregnancy, blood and placenta cultures are the most reliable ways to discover if symptoms are due to listeriosis.
Pregnant women are about 20 times more likely to contract listeriosis than other healthy adults. It can result in miscarriage or stillbirth. Newborn may also have low birth weight, septicaemia and meningitis. People with HIV are at least 300 times more likely to get ill than those with a normally functioning immune system.
Due to the long incubation period, it is challenging to identify the food which was the actual source of the infection.
Listeriosis can be treated if diagnosed early. Antibiotics are used to treat severe symptoms such as meningitis. When infection occurs during pregnancy, prompt administration of antibiotics prevents infection of the fetus or newborn.
The control of L. monocytogenes is required at all stages in the food chain and an integrated approach is needed to prevent the multiplication of this bacteria in the final food product. The challenges for controlling L. monocytogenes are considerable given its ubiquitous nature, high resistance to common preservative methods, such as the use of salt, smoke or acidic condition in the food, and its ability to survive and grow at refrigeration temperatures . All sectors of the food chain should Implement Good Hygienic Practices and Good Manufacturing Practices as well as implement a food safety management system based on the principles of Hazard Analysis Critical Control Points .
Food manufacturers should also test against microbiological criteria, as appropriate, when validating and verifying the correct functioning of their HACCP based procedures and other hygiene control measures. In addition, producers manufacturing food associated with risks of Listeria must conduct environmental monitoring to identify and eliminate niche environments, including areas that favor the establishment and proliferation of L. monocytogenes.
Modern technologies using genetic fingerprint – Whole Genome Sequencing – allow for more rapid identification of the food source of listeriosis outbreaks by linking L. monocytogens isolated from patients with those isolated from foods.
L. monocytogenes in food are killed by pasteurization and cooking.
In general, guidance on the prevention of listeriosis is similar to guidance used to help prevent other foodborne illnesses. This includes practicing safe food handling and following the WHO Five Keys to Safer Food: Persons in high risk groups should:
It is important to respect the shelf-life and storage temperature written on labels of ready-to-eat foods to ensure that bacteria potentially present in these foods does not multiply to dangerously high numbers. Cooking before eating is another very effective way to kill the bacteria.
WHO promotes the strengthening of food safety systems, good manufacturing practices and educating retailers and consumers on appropriate food handling and avoiding contamination. Educating consumers, especially those in high risk groups, and training of food handlers in safe food handling are among the most critical means to prevent foodborne illnesses including listeriosis.
WHO and FAO have published an international quantitative risk assessment of Listeria in ready-to-eat foods This has formed the scientific basis for the Codex Alimentarius Commission Guidelines on the Application of General Principles of Food Hygiene to the Control of Listeria Monocytogenes in Foods. This guidance includes microbiological criteria WHO’s main tool to assist Member States in surveillance, coordination and response to outbreaks is the International Network of Food Safety Authorities which links national authorities in Member States in charge of managing food safety events. This network is managed jointly by WHO and FAO.
Related
Fact sheets

========================================
lymphatic-filariasis
========================================
Lymphatic filariasis (LF), commonly known as elephantiasis, is a neglected tropical disease. Infection occurs when filarial parasites are transmitted to humans through mosquitoes. Infection is usually acquired in childhood and causes hidden damage to the lymphatic system.
The painful and profoundly disfiguring visible manifestations of the disease – lymphoedema, elephantiasis and scrotal swelling – occur later in life and can lead to permanent disability. People affected by LF are not only physically disabled, but suffer mental, social and financial losses contributing to stigma and poverty.
In 2023, 657 million people in 39 countries were living in areas that require preventive chemotherapy to stop the spread of infection.
The global baseline estimate of people affected by lymphatic filariasis was 25 million men with hydrocele and over 15 million people with lymphoedema. At least 36 million people remain with these chronic disease manifestations. Eliminating lymphatic filariasis can prevent unnecessary suffering and contribute to the reduction of poverty.
Lymphatic filariasis is caused by infection with parasites classified as nematodes of the family Filariodidea. There are 3 types of these thread-like filarial worms:
Adult worms nest in the lymphatic vessels and disrupt the normal function of the lymphatic system. The worms can live for approximately 6–8 years and, during their life time, produce millions of microfilariae that circulate in the blood.
Mosquitoes are infected with microfilariae by ingesting blood when biting an infected host. Microfilariae mature into infective larvae within the mosquito. When infected mosquitoes bite people, mature parasite larvae are deposited on the skin, from where they can enter the body. The larvae then migrate to the lymphatic vessels where they develop into adult worms, thus continuing a cycle of transmission.
Lymphatic filariasis is transmitted by different types of mosquitoes, for example by the Culex mosquito, widespread across urban and semi-urban areas, Anopheles, mainly found in rural areas, and Aedes, mainly in endemic islands in the Pacific. Lymphatic filariasis infection involves asymptomatic, acute and chronic conditions. The majority of infections are asymptomatic, showing no external signs of infection while contributing to the transmission of the parasite. These asymptomatic infections still cause damage to the lymphatic system and the kidneys and alter the body's immune system.
When lymphatic filariasis develops into chronic conditions it leads to lymphoedema or elephantiasis of limbs and hydrocele . Involvement of breasts and genital organs is common. Such body deformities often lead to social stigma and sub-optimal mental health, loss of income-earning opportunities and increased medical expenses for patients and their caretakers. The socioeconomic burdens of isolation and poverty are immense.
Acute episodes of local inflammation involving skin, lymph nodes and lymphatic vessels often accompany chronic lymphoedema or elephantiasis. Some of these episodes are caused by the body's immune response to the parasite. Most are the result of secondary bacterial skin infection where normal defenses have been partially lost due to underlying lymphatic damage. These acute attacks are debilitating, may last for weeks and are the primary cause of lost wages among people suffering with lymphatic filariasis.
Elimination of lymphatic filariasis is possible by stopping the spread of the infection through preventive chemotherapy. The WHO recommended preventive chemotherapy strategy for lymphatic filariasis elimination is mass drug administration . MDA involves administering an annual dose of medicines to the entire at-risk population. The medicines used have a limited effect on adult parasites but effectively reduce the density of microfilariae in the bloodstream and prevent the spread of parasites to mosquitoes.
The MDA regimen recommended depends on the co-endemicity of lymphatic filariasis with other filarial diseases. WHO recommends the following MDA regimens:
diethylcarbamazine citrate and albendazole in countries without onchocerciasis; and The impact of MDA depends on the efficacy of the regimen and the coverage . MDA with the 2-medicine regimens have interrupted the transmission cycle when conducted annually for at least 4–6 years with effective coverage of the total population at risk. Salt fortified with DEC has also been used in a few unique settings to interrupt the transmission cycle.
At the start of GPELF, 81 countries were considered endemic for lymphatic filariasis. Further epidemiological data reviewed since, indicate that preventive chemotherapy was not required in 10 countries. From 2000 to 2023, 9.7 billion cumulative treatments were delivered to more than 943 million people at least once in 71 countries, considerably reducing transmission in many places. The population requiring MDA has declined by 58.6% where infection prevalence has been reduced below elimination thresholds. The overall economic benefit of the programme during 2000–2007 is conservatively estimated at US$ 24 billion. Treatments until 2015 are estimated to have averted at least US$ 100.5 billion of economic loss expected to have occurred over the lifetime of cohorts who have benefited from treatment.
Twenty-one countries and territories (Bangladesh, Brazil, Cambodia, the Cook Islands, Egypt, Kiribati, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Maldives, Malawi, Marshall Islands, Niue, Palau, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Wallis and Futuna, and Yemen) are now acknowledged as achieving elimination of lymphatic filariasis as a public health problem. By 2023, 14 countries had successfully implemented recommended strategies, stopped large-scale treatment and are under surveillance to demonstrate that elimination has been achieved. Preventive chemotherapy is still required in 39 countries and within 6 of these countries MDA has not yet been delivered to all endemic areas as of the end of 2023. Morbidity management and disability prevention are vital for improving public health and are essential services that should be provided by the health care system to ensure sustainability. Surgery can alleviate most cases of hydrocele. Clinical severity and progression of the disease, including acute inflammatory episodes, can be reduced and prevented with simple measures of hygiene, skin care, exercises and elevation of affected limbs. People with lymphoedema must have access to continuing care throughout their lives, both to manage the disease and to prevent progression to more advanced stages.
The GPELF aims to provide access to an essential package of care for every person with associated chronic manifestations of lymphatic filariasis in all areas where the disease is present, thus alleviating suffering and promoting improvement in their quality of life.
Goals toward the elimination of lymphatic filariasis will be achieved if affected people have access to the following essential package of care:
Mosquito control is a supplemental strategy supported by WHO. It is used to reduce transmission of lymphatic filariasis and other mosquito-borne infections. Depending on the parasite-vector species, measures such as insecticide-treated nets, indoor residual spraying or personal protection measures may help protect people from infection. The use of insecticide-treated nets in areas where Anopheles is the primary vector for filariasis enhances the impact on transmission during and after MDA. Historically, vector control has in select settings contributed to the elimination of lymphatic filariasis in the absence of large-scale preventive chemotherapy.
World Health Assembly resolution WHA50.29 encourages Member States to eliminate lymphatic filariasis as a public health problem. In response, WHO launched its Global Programme to Eliminate Lymphatic Filariasis in 2000. WHO’s strategy is based on 2 key components: In 2020, GPELF set the following goals for the new NTD Road Map :
Related
News
Fact sheets
Feature stories

========================================
malaria
========================================
Malaria is a life-threatening disease spread to humans by some types of mosquitoes. It is mostly found in tropical countries. It is preventable and curable.
The infection is caused by a parasite and does not spread from person to person.
Symptoms can be mild or life-threatening. Mild symptoms are fever, chills and headache. Severe symptoms include fatigue, confusion, seizures, and difficulty breathing.
Infants, children under 5 years, pregnant women and girls, travellers and people with HIV or AIDS are at higher risk of severe infection. Malaria can be prevented by avoiding mosquito bites and with medicines. Treatments can stop mild cases from getting worse.
Malaria mostly spreads to people through the bites of some infected female Anopheles mosquitoes. Blood transfusion and contaminated needles may also transmit malaria. The first symptoms may be mild, similar to many febrile illnesses, and difficulty to recognize as malaria. Left untreated, P. falciparum malaria can progress to severe illness and death within 24 hours.
There are 5 Plasmodium parasite species that cause malaria in humans and 2 of these species – P. falciparum and P. vivax – pose the greatest threat. P. falciparum is the deadliest malaria parasite and the most prevalent on the African continent. P. vivax is the dominant malaria parasite in most countries outside of sub-Saharan Africa. The other malaria species which can infect humans are P. malariae, P. ovale and P. knowlesi.
The most common early symptoms of malaria are fever, headache and chills.
Symptoms usually start within 10–15 days of getting bitten by an infected mosquito.
Symptoms may be mild for some people, especially for those who have had a malaria infection before. Because some malaria symptoms are not specific, getting tested early is important. Some types of malaria can cause severe illness and death. Infants, children under 5 years, pregnant women, travellers and people with HIV or AIDS are at higher risk. Severe symptoms include:
People with severe symptoms should get emergency care right away. Getting treatment early for mild malaria can stop the infection from becoming severe. Malaria infection during pregnancy can also cause premature delivery or delivery of a baby with low birth weight. According to the latest World malaria report, there were 263 million cases of malaria in 2023 compared to 252 million cases in 2022. The estimated number of malaria deaths stood at 597 000 in 2023 compared to 600 000 in 2022.
The WHO African Region continues to carry a disproportionately high share of the global malaria burden. In 2023 the Region was home to about 94% of all malaria cases and 95% of deaths. Children under 5 years of age accounted for about 76% of all malaria deaths in the Region.
Over half of these deaths occurred in four countries: Nigeria , the Democratic Republic of the Congo , Niger and United Republic of Tanzania .
Malaria can be prevented by avoiding mosquito bites and by taking medicines. Talk to a doctor about taking medicines such as chemoprophylaxis before travelling to areas where malaria is common.
Lower the risk of getting malaria by avoiding mosquito bites: Vector control is a vital component of malaria control and elimination strategies as it is highly effective in preventing infection and reducing disease transmission. The 2 core interventions are insecticide-treated nets and indoor residual spraying . Progress in global malaria control is threatened by emerging resistance to insecticides among Anopheles mosquitoes. However, new generation nets, which provide better protection against malaria than pyrethroid-only nets, are becoming more widely available and represent an important tool in global efforts to combat malaria. Anopheles stephensi presents an added challenge for malaria control in Africa. Originally native to parts of south Asia and the Arabian Peninsula, the invasive mosquito species has been expanding its range over the last decade, with detections reported to date in eight African countries. An. stephensi thrives in urban settings, endures high temperatures and is resistant to many of the insecticides used in public health.
Travellers to malaria endemic areas should consult their doctor several weeks before departure. The medical professional will determine which chemoprophylaxis drugs are appropriate for the country of destination. In some cases, chemoprophylaxis drugs must be started 2–3 weeks before departure. All prophylactic drugs should be taken on schedule for the duration of the stay in the malaria risk area and should be continued for 4 weeks after the last possible exposure to infection since parasites may still emerge from the liver during this period.
Preventive chemotherapy is the use of medicines, either alone or in combination, to prevent malaria infections and their consequences. It requires giving a full treatment course of an antimalarial medicine to vulnerable populations at designated time points during the period of greatest malarial risk, regardless of whether the recipients are infected with malaria. Preventive chemotherapy includes perennial malaria chemoprevention , seasonal malaria chemoprevention , intermittent preventive treatment of malaria in pregnancy and school-aged children , post-discharge malaria chemoprevention and mass drug administration . These safe and cost-effective strategies are intended to complement ongoing malaria control activities, including vector control measures, prompt diagnosis of suspected malaria, and treatment of confirmed cases with antimalarial medicines.
Since October 2021, WHO has recommended broad use of the RTS,S/AS01 malaria vaccine among children living in regions with moderate to high P. falciparum malaria transmission. The vaccine has been shown to significantly reduce malaria, and deadly severe malaria, among young children. In October 2023, WHO recommended a second safe and effective malaria vaccine, R21/Matrix-M. Vaccines are now being rolled out in routine childhood immunization programmes across Africa. Malaria vaccines in Africa are expected to save tens of thousands of young lives every year. The highest impact will be achieved, however, when the vaccines are introduced alongside a mix of other WHO-recommended malaria interventions such as bed nets and chemoprophylaxis.
Questions and answers on malaria vaccines
Early diagnosis and treatment of malaria reduces disease, prevents deaths and contributes to reducing transmission. WHO recommends that all suspected cases of malaria be confirmed using parasite-based diagnostic testing . Malaria is a serious infection and always requires treatment with medicine. Multiple medicines are used to prevent and treat malaria. Doctors will choose one or more based on: These are the most common medicines for malaria:
Most medicines used are in pill form. Some people may need to go to a health centre or hospital for injectable medicines. Subsequent to the emergence of partial artemisinin resistance in the Greater Mekong subregion, WHO is very concerned about confirmed partial artemisinin resistance in Eritrea, Rwanda, Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania. Based on available evidence, such resistance is also suspected in Ethiopia, Namibia, Sudan and Zambia. In 2022, WHO developed a strategy to curb antimalarial drug resistance in Africa. Regular monitoring of antimalarial drug efficacy is needed to inform treatment policies in malaria-endemic countries, and to ensure early detection of, and response to, drug resistance.
For more on WHO’s work on antimalarial drug resistance in the Greater Mekong subregion, visit the Mekong Malaria Elimination Programme webpage. Most rapid diagnostic tests for malaria target one or two specific proteins produced by the P. falciparum malaria parasite: HRP2 and HRP3. However, parasites with genetic mutations, that prevent the expression of these proteins, are not detected by these tests. This means that malaria patients may not be diagnosed, allowing these mutated parasites to spread. In 2023, these mutated parasites were reported in 41 malaria endemic countries, including in Burkina Faso, Chad, Togo, and Indonesia for the first time. Although their prevalence is still low in most countries, it exceeds 15% in Brazil, Djibouti, Eritrea, Nicaragua and Peru.
Malaria elimination is defined as the interruption of local transmission of a specified malaria parasite species in a defined geographical area as a result of deliberate activities. Continued measures to prevent re-establishment of transmission are required.
Countries and territories certified malaria-free by WHO.
Malaria surveillance is the continuous and systematic collection, analysis and interpretation of malaria-related data, and the use of that data in the planning, implementation and evaluation of public health practice. Improved surveillance of malaria cases and deaths helps ministries of health determine which areas or population groups are most affected and enables countries to monitor changing disease patterns. Strong malaria surveillance systems also help countries design effective health interventions and evaluate the impact of their malaria control programmes.
The WHO Global technical strategy for malaria 2016–2030, updated in 2021, provides a technical framework for all malaria-endemic countries. It is intended to guide and support regional and country programmes as they work towards malaria control and elimination.
The strategy sets ambitious but achievable global targets, including:
Guided by this strategy, the Global Malaria Programme coordinates the WHO’s global efforts to control and eliminate malaria by:
Related
News
Feature stories
More
Malaria health topic pageWorld Malaria Day WHO Global Malaria Programme Malaria Policy Advisory Group

========================================
malnutrition
========================================
Malnutrition refers to deficiencies, excesses, or imbalances in a person’s intake of energy and/or nutrients. The term malnutrition addresses 3 broad groups of conditions:
There are 4 broad sub-forms of undernutrition: wasting, stunting, underweight, and deficiencies in vitamins and minerals. Undernutrition makes children in particular much more vulnerable to disease and death.
Low weight-for-height is known as wasting. It usually indicates recent and severe weight loss because a person has not had enough food to eat and/or they have had an infectious disease, such as diarrhoea, which has caused them to lose weight. A young child who is moderately or severely wasted has an increased risk of death, but treatment is possible.
Low height-for-age is known as stunting. It is the result of chronic or recurrent undernutrition, usually associated with poor socioeconomic conditions, poor maternal health and nutrition, frequent illness, and/or inappropriate infant and young child feeding and care in early life. Stunting holds children back from reaching their physical and cognitive potential.
Children with low weight-for-age are known as underweight. A child who is underweight may be stunted, wasted or both.
Inadequacies in intake of vitamins and minerals often referred to as micronutrients, can also be grouped together. Micronutrients enable the body to produce enzymes, hormones and other substances that are essential for proper growth and development.
Iodine, vitamin A, and iron are the most important in global public health terms; their deficiency represents a major threat to the health and development of populations worldwide, particularly children and pregnant women in low-income countries.
Overweight and obesity is when a person is too heavy for his or her height. Abnormal or excessive fat accumulation can impair health.
Body mass index is an index of weight-for-height commonly used to classify overweight and obesity. It is defined as a person’s weight in kilograms divided by the square of his/her height in meters . In adults, overweight is defined as a BMI of 25 or more, whereas obesity is a BMI of 30 or more. Among children and adolescents, BMI thresholds for overweight and obesity vary by age.
Overweight and obesity result from an imbalance between energy consumed and energy expended . Globally, people are consuming foods and drinks that are more energy-dense and engaging in less physical activity.
Diet-related noncommunicable diseases include cardiovascular diseases , certain cancers, and diabetes. Unhealthy diets and poor nutrition are among the top risk factors for these diseases globally.
In 2022, approximately 390 million adults aged 18 years and older worldwide were underweight, while 2.5 billion were overweight, including 890 million who were living with obesity. Among children and adolescents aged 5-19 years, 390 million were overweight, including 160 million who were living with obesity. Another 190 million were living with thinness .
In 2022, an estimated 149 million children under the age of 5 years were suffering from stunting, while 37 million were living with overweight or obesity.
Nearly half of deaths among children under 5 years of age are linked to undernutrition. These mostly occur in low- and middle-income countries. Every country in the world is affected by one or more forms of malnutrition. Combating malnutrition in all its forms is one of the greatest global health challenges.
Women, infants, children, and adolescents are at particular risk of malnutrition. Optimizing nutrition early in life –including the 1000 days from conception to a child’s second birthday – ensures the best possible start in life, with long-term benefits.
Poverty amplifies the risk of, and risks from, malnutrition. People who are poor are more likely to be affected by different forms of malnutrition. Also, malnutrition increases health care costs, reduces productivity, and slows economic growth, which can perpetuate a cycle of poverty and ill-health.
On 1 April 2016, the United Nations (UN) General Assembly proclaimed 2016–2025 the United Nations Decade of Action on Nutrition. The Decade is an unprecedented opportunity for addressing all forms of malnutrition. It sets a concrete timeline for implementation of the commitments made at the Second International Conference on Nutrition to meet a set of global nutrition targets and diet-related NCD targets by 2025, as well as relevant targets in the Agenda for Sustainable Development by 2030 – in particular, Sustainable Development Goal 2 and SDG 3 .
Led by WHO and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations , the UN Decade of Action on Nutrition calls for policy action across 6 key areas:
WHO aims for a world free of all forms of malnutrition, where all people achieve health and wellbeing. According to the 2016–2025 nutrition strategy, WHO works with Member States and partners towards universal access to effective nutrition interventions and to healthy diets from sustainable and resilient food systems. WHO uses its convening power to help set, align and advocate for priorities and policies that move nutrition forward globally; develops evidence-informed guidance based on robust scientific and ethical frameworks; supports the adoption of guidance and implementation of effective nutrition actions; and monitors and evaluates policy and programme implementation and nutrition outcomes.
This work is framed by the Comprehensive implementation plan on maternal, infant, and young child nutrition, adopted by Member States through a World Health Assembly resolution in 2012. Actions to end malnutrition are also vital for achieving the diet-related targets of the Global action plan for the prevention and control of noncommunicable diseases 2013–2020, the Global strategy for women’s, children’s, and adolescent’s health 2016–2030, and the 2030 Agenda for sustainable development.
Related
News
Fact sheets
Feature stories
More
Comprehensive implementation plan on maternal, infant and young child nutritionGlobal action plan for the prevention and control of NCDs 2013-2020Global nutrition targets for 2025Second International Conference on Nutrition UN Decade of Action on Nutrition 2016-2025

========================================
maternal-mortality
========================================
Maternal mortality is unacceptably high. About 260 000 women died during and following pregnancy and childbirth in 2023. Approximately 92% of all maternal deaths occurred in low- and lower-middle-income countries in 2023, and most could have been prevented.
Sustainable Development Goal regions and sub-regions are used here. Sub-Saharan Africa and southern Asia accounted for around 87% of the estimated global maternal deaths in 2023. Sub-Saharan Africa alone accounted for around 70% of maternal deaths , while southern Asia accounted for around 17% .
At the same time, between 2000 and 2023, eastern Europe and southern Asia achieved the greatest overall reduction in maternal mortality ratio : a decline of 75% and 71% , respectively. Despite its very high MMR in 2023, sub-Saharan Africa also achieved a substantial reduction in MMR of 40% between 2000 and 2023. The greatest reduction in lifetime risk of maternal death during this period occurred in the region of central and southern Asia, with an 83% fall in risk from 1 in 71 in 2000 to 1 in 410 in 2023. In five regions, the lifetime risk of maternal mortality reduced by more than half: sub-Saharan Africa, northern Africa and western Asia, Australia and New Zealand, eastern and south-eastern Asia, and Oceania . The high number of maternal deaths in some areas of the world reflects inequalities in access to quality health services and highlights the gap between rich and poor. The MMR in low-income countries in 2023 was 346 per 100 000 live births versus 10 per 100 000 live births in high income countries.
In 2023, 37 countries were classified as being in conflict or institutional/social fragility (1), accounting for 61% of global maternal deaths despite representing only 25% of global live births. The MMR is significantly higher in conflict-affected areas compared to fragile settings and non-conflict nor fragile settings (99). Women in low-income countries have a higher lifetime risk of death of maternal death. A woman’s lifetime risk of maternal death is the probability that a 15-year-old woman will eventually die from a maternal cause. In high income countries, this is 1 in 7933, versus 1 in 66 in low-income countries.
Women die as a result of complications during and following pregnancy and childbirth. Most of these complications develop during pregnancy and most are preventable or treatable. Other complications may exist before pregnancy but are worsened during pregnancy, especially if not managed as part of the woman’s care. The major complications that account for around 75% of all maternal deaths are (1):
To avoid maternal deaths, it is vital to prevent unintended pregnancies. All women, including adolescents, need access to contraception, safe abortion services to the full extent of the law, and quality post-abortion care.
Most maternal deaths are preventable, as the health-care solutions to prevent or manage complications are well known. All women need access to high quality care in pregnancy, and during and after childbirth. Maternal health and newborn health are closely linked. It is particularly important that all births are attended by skilled health professionals, as timely management and treatment can make the difference between life and death for the women as well as for the newborns. Poor women in remote areas are the least likely to receive adequate health care (3). This is especially true for SDG regions with relatively low numbers of skilled health care providers, such as sub-Saharan Africa and southern Asia.
The latest available data suggest that in most high-income and upper-middle-income countries, approximately 99% of all births benefit from the presence of a trained midwife, doctor or nurse. However, only 73% in low income and 84% in lower-middle-income countries are assisted by such skilled health personnel (3).
Factors that prevent women from receiving or seeking care during pregnancy and childbirth are:
To improve maternal health, barriers that limit access to quality maternal health services must be identified and addressed at both health system and societal levels.
The MMR rose in 2021 . It is possible that the COVID-19 pandemic contributed to this via two mechanisms: (i) indirect obstetric deaths – where the woman had SARS-CoV-2 infection and died as a result of the interaction between COVID-19 and her pregnant state; and/or (ii) direct obstetric deaths – where disruptions to health services hindered access to and/or quality of care resulting in pregnancy complications that ended in mortality, when they may otherwise have been prevented or managed successfully (4). The data show that this interruption to the downward trajectory of global MMR was short-lived. In 2022, the global MMR and number of maternal deaths were lower than they had been in the three years immediately prior to the COVID-19 pandemic. In the context of the Sustainable Development Goals , countries have united behind the target to accelerate the decline of maternal mortality by 2030. SDG 3 includes an ambitious target: “reducing the global MMR to less than 70 per 100 000 births, with no country having a maternal mortality rate of more than twice the global average”.
The global MMR in 2023 was 197 per 100 000 live births; achieving a global MMR below 70 by the year 2030 will require an annual rate of reduction of almost 15%, a rate that has rarely been achieved at the national level. However, scientific and medical knowledge are available to prevent most maternal deaths. As 2030 approaches, the end of the SDG era, now is the time to intensify coordinated efforts, and to mobilize and reinvigorate global, regional, national and community-level commitments to end preventable maternal mortality.
Improving maternal health is one of WHO’s key priorities. WHO works to contribute to the reduction of maternal mortality by increasing research evidence, providing evidence-based clinical and programmatic guidance, setting global standards and providing technical support to Member States on developing and implementing effective policy and programmes.
As defined in the Strategies toward ending preventable maternal mortality and Ending preventable maternal mortality: a renewed focus for improving maternal and newborn health and well-being, WHO is working with partners in supporting countries towards:
References
Related
News
Fact sheets
Feature stories

========================================
mental-disorders
========================================
A mental disorder is characterized by a clinically significant disturbance in an individual’s cognition, emotional regulation, or behaviour. It is usually associated with distress or impairment in important areas of functioning. There are many different types of mental disorders. Mental disorders may also be referred to as mental health conditions. The latter is a broader term covering mental disorders, psychosocial disabilities and mental states associated with significant distress, impairment in functioning, or risk of self-harm. This fact sheet focuses on mental disorders as described by the International Classification of Diseases 11th Revision .
In 2019, 1 in every 8 people, or 970 million people around the world were living with a mental disorder, with anxiety and depressive disorders the most common (1). In 2020, the number of people living with anxiety and depressive disorders rose significantly because of the COVID-19 pandemic. Initial estimates show a 26% and 28% increase respectively for anxiety and major depressive disorders in just one year (2). While effective prevention and treatment options exist, most people with mental disorders do not have access to effective care. Many people also experience stigma, discrimination and violations of human rights. In 2019, 301 million people were living with an anxiety disorder including 58 million children and adolescents (1). Anxiety disorders are characterised by excessive fear and worry and related behavioural disturbances. Symptoms are severe enough to result in significant distress or significant impairment in functioning. There are several different kinds of anxiety disorders, such as: generalised anxiety disorder , panic disorder , social anxiety disorder , separation anxiety disorder (characterised by excessive fear or anxiety about separation from those individuals to whom the person has a deep emotional bond), and others. Effective psychological treatment exists, and depending on the age and severity, medication may also be considered.
In 2019, 280 million people were living with depression, including 23 million children and adolescents (1). Depression is different from usual mood fluctuations and short-lived emotional responses to challenges in everyday life. During a depressive episode, the person experiences depressed mood or a loss of pleasure or interest in activities, for most of the day, nearly every day, for at least two weeks. Several other symptoms are also present, which may include poor concentration, feelings of excessive guilt or low self-worth, hopelessness about the future, thoughts about dying or suicide, disrupted sleep, changes in appetite or weight, and feeling especially tired or low in energy. People with depression are at an increased risk of suicide. Yet, effective psychological treatment exists, and depending on the age and severity, medication may also be considered. In 2019, 40 million people experienced bipolar disorder (1). People with bipolar disorder experience alternating depressive episodes with periods of manic symptoms. During a depressive episode, the person experiences depressed mood or a loss of pleasure or interest in activities, for most of the day, nearly every day. Manic symptoms may include euphoria or irritability, increased activity or energy, and other symptoms such as increased talkativeness, racing thoughts, increased self-esteem, decreased need for sleep, distractibility, and impulsive reckless behaviour. People with bipolar disorder are at an increased risk of suicide. Yet effective treatment options exist including psychoeducation, reduction of stress and strengthening of social functioning, and medication.
The prevalence of PTSD and other mental disorders is high in conflict-affected settings (3). PTSD may develop following exposure to an extremely threatening or horrific event or series of events. It is characterised by all of the following: 1) re-experiencing the traumatic event or events in the present ; 2) avoidance of thoughts and memories of the event(s), or avoidance of activities, situations, or people reminiscent of the event(s); and 3) persistent perceptions of heightened current threat. These symptoms persist for at least several weeks and cause significant impairment in functioning. Effective psychological treatment exists. Schizophrenia affects approximately 24 million people or 1 in 300 people worldwide (1). People with schizophrenia have a life expectancy 10-20 years below that of the general population (4). Schizophrenia is characterised by significant impairments in perception and changes in behaviour. Symptoms may include persistent delusions, hallucinations, disorganised thinking, highly disorganised behaviour, or extreme agitation. People with schizophrenia may experience persistent difficulties with their cognitive functioning. Yet, a range of effective treatment options exist, including medication, psychoeducation, family interventions, and psychosocial rehabilitation. In 2019, 14 million people experienced eating disorders including almost 3 million children and adolescents (1). Eating disorders, such as anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa, involve abnormal eating and preoccupation with food as well as prominent body weight and shape concerns. The symptoms or behaviours result in significant risk or damage to health, significant distress, or significant impairment of functioning. Anorexia nervosa often has its onset during adolescence or early adulthood and is associated with premature death due to medical complications or suicide. Individuals with bulimia nervosa are at a significantly increased risk for substance use, suicidality, and health complications. Effective treatment options exist, including family-based treatment and cognitive-based therapy.
40 million people, including children and adolescents, were living with conduct-dissocial disorder in 2019 (1). This disorder, also known as conduct disorder, is one of two disruptive behaviour and dissocial disorders, the other is oppositional defiant disorder. Disruptive behaviour and dissocial disorders are characterised by persistent behaviour problems such as persistently defiant or disobedient to behaviours that persistently violate the basic rights of others or major age-appropriate societal norms, rules, or laws. Onset of disruptive and dissocial disorders, is commonly, though not always, during childhood. Effective psychological treatments exist, often involving parents, caregivers, and teachers, cognitive problem-solving or social skills training.
Neurodevelopmental disorders are behavioural and cognitive disorders, that? arise during the developmental period, and involve significant difficulties in the acquisition and execution of specific intellectual, motor, language, or social functions.
Neurodevelopmental disorders include disorders of intellectual development, autism spectrum disorder, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder amongst others. ADHD is characterised by a persistent pattern of inattention and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity that has a direct negative impact on academic, occupational, or social functioning. Disorders of intellectual development are characterised by significant limitations in intellectual functioning and adaptive behaviour, which refers to difficulties with everyday conceptual, social, and practical skills that are performed in daily life. Autism spectrum disorder constitutes a diverse group of conditions characterised by some degree of difficulty with social communication and reciprocal social interaction, as well as persistent restricted, repetitive, and inflexible patterns of behaviour, interests, or activities.
Effective treatment options exist including psychosocial interventions, behavioural interventions, occupational and speech therapy. For certain diagnoses and age groups, medication may also be considered.
At any one time, a diverse set of individual, family, community, and structural factors may combine to protect or undermine mental health. Although most people are resilient, people who are exposed to adverse circumstances – including poverty, violence, disability, and inequality – are at higher risk. Protective and risk factors include individual psychological and biological factors, such as emotional skills as well as genetics. Many of the risk and protective factors are influenced through changes in brain structure and/or function.
Health systems have not yet adequately responded to the needs of people with mental disorders and are significantly under resourced. The gap between the need for treatment and its provision is wide all over the world; and is often poor in quality when delivered. For example, only 29% of people with psychosis (5) and only one third of people with depression receive formal mental health care (6). People with mental disorders also require social support, including support in developing and maintaining personal, family, and social relationships. People with mental disorders may also need support for educational programmes, employment, housing, and participation in other meaningful activities. WHO’s Comprehensive Mental Health Action Plan 2013-2030 recognizes the essential role of mental health in achieving health for all people. The plan includes 4 major objectives:
WHO's Mental Health Gap Action Programme uses evidence-based technical guidance, tools and training packages to expand services in countries, especially in resource-poor settings. It focuses on a prioritized set of conditions, directing capacity building towards non-specialized health-care providers in an integrated approach that promotes mental health at all levels of care. The WHO mhGAP Intervention Guide 2.0 is part of this Programme, and provides guidance for doctors, nurses, and other health workers in non-specialist health settings on assessment and management of mental disorders. (1) Institute of Health Metrics and Evaluation. Global Health Data Exchange , .
(2) Mental Health and COVID-19: Early evidence of the pandemic’s impact. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2022.
(3) Charlson, F., van Ommeren, M., Flaxman, A., Cornett, J., Whiteford, H., & Saxena, S. New WHO prevalence estimates of mental disorders in conflict settings: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet. 2019;394,240–248.
(4) Laursen TM, Nordentoft M, Mortensen PB. Excess early mortality in schizophrenia. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 2014;10,425-438.
(5) Mental health atlas 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2021
(6) Moitra M, Santomauro D, Collins PY, Vos T, Whiteford H, Saxena S, et al. The global gap in treatment coverage for major depressive disorder in 84 countries from 2000–2019: a systematic review and Bayesian meta-regression analysis. PLoS Med. 2022;19(2):e1003901. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1003901.
Related
Fact sheets

========================================
mental-health-strengthening-our-response
========================================
Concepts in mental health
Mental health is a state of mental well-being that enables people to cope with the stresses of life, realize their abilities, learn well and work well, and contribute to their community. It is an integral component of health and well-being that underpins our individual and collective abilities to make decisions, build relationships and shape the world we live in. Mental health is a basic human right. And it is crucial to personal, community and socio-economic development.
Mental health is more than the absence of mental disorders. It exists on a complex continuum, which is experienced differently from one person to the next, with varying degrees of difficulty and distress and potentially very different social and clinical outcomes. Mental health conditions include mental disorders and psychosocial disabilities as well as other mental states associated with significant distress, impairment in functioning, or risk of self-harm. People with mental health conditions are more likely to experience lower levels of mental well-being, but this is not always or necessarily the case. Throughout our lives, multiple individual, social and structural determinants may combine to protect or undermine our mental health and shift our position on the mental health continuum. Individual psychological and biological factors such as emotional skills, substance use and genetics can make people more vulnerable to mental health problems. Exposure to unfavourable social, economic, geopolitical and environmental circumstances – including poverty, violence, inequality and environmental deprivation – also increases people’s risk of experiencing mental health conditions. Risks can manifest themselves at all stages of life, but those that occur during developmentally sensitive periods, especially early childhood, are particularly detrimental. For example, harsh parenting and physical punishment is known to undermine child health and bullying is a leading risk factor for mental health conditions.
Protective factors similarly occur throughout our lives and serve to strengthen resilience. They include our individual social and emotional skills and attributes as well as positive social interactions, quality education, decent work, safe neighbourhoods and community cohesion, among others.
Mental health risks and protective factors can be found in society at different scales. Local threats heighten risk for individuals, families and communities. Global threats heighten risk for whole populations and include economic downturns, disease outbreaks, humanitarian emergencies and forced displacement and the growing climate crisis.
Each single risk and protective factor has only limited predictive strength. Most people do not develop a mental health condition despite exposure to a risk factor and many people with no known risk factor still develop a mental health condition. Nonetheless, the interacting determinants of mental health serve to enhance or undermine mental health.
Promotion and prevention interventions work by identifying the individual, social and structural determinants of mental health, and then intervening to reduce risks, build resilience and establish supportive environments for mental health. Interventions can be designed for individuals, specific groups or whole populations. Reshaping the determinants of mental health often requires action beyond the health sector and so promotion and prevention programmes should involve the education, labour, justice, transport, environment, housing, and welfare sectors. The health sector can contribute significantly by embedding promotion and prevention efforts within health services; and by advocating, initiating and, where appropriate, facilitating multisectoral collaboration and coordination.
Suicide prevention is a global priority and included in the Sustainable Development Goals. Much progress can be achieved by limiting access to means, responsible media reporting, social and emotional learning for adolescents and early intervention. Banning highly hazardous pesticides is a particularly inexpensive and cost–effective intervention for reducing suicide rates.
Promoting child and adolescent mental health is another priority and can be achieved by policies and laws that promote and protect mental health, supporting caregivers to provide nurturing care, implementing school-based programmes and improving the quality of community and online environments. School-based social and emotional learning programmes are among the most effective promotion strategies for countries at all income levels.
Promoting and protecting mental health at work is a growing area of interest and can be supported through legislation and regulation, organizational strategies, manager training and interventions for workers.
In the context of national efforts to strengthen mental health, it is vital to not only protect and promote the mental well-being of all, but also to address the needs of people with mental health conditions. This should be done through community-based mental health care, which is more accessible and acceptable than institutional care, helps prevent human rights violations and delivers better recovery outcomes for people with mental health conditions. Community-based mental health care should be provided through a network of interrelated services that comprise: The vast care gap for common mental health conditions such as depression and anxiety means countries must also find innovative ways to diversify and scale up care for these conditions, for example through non-specialist psychological counselling or digital self-help.
All WHO Member States are committed to implementing the “Comprehensive mental health action plan 2013–2030", which aims to improve mental health by strengthening effective leadership and governance, providing comprehensive, integrated and responsive community-based care, implementing promotion and prevention strategies, and strengthening information systems, evidence and research. In 2020, WHO’s “Mental health atlas 2020” analysis of country performance against the action plan showed insufficient advances against the targets of the agreed action plan. WHO’s “World mental health report: transforming mental health for all” calls on all countries to accelerate implementation of the action plan. It argues that all countries can achieve meaningful progress towards better mental health for their populations by focusing on three “paths to transformation”:
WHO gives particular emphasis to protecting and promoting human rights, empowering people with lived experience and ensuring a multisectoral and multistakeholder approach. WHO continues to work nationally and internationally – including in humanitarian settings – to provide governments and partners with the strategic leadership, evidence, tools and technical support to strengthen a collective response to mental health and enable a transformation towards better mental health for all. Related
Publications
More about mental health
Fact sheets

========================================
mental-health-at-work
========================================
Almost 60% of the world population is in work (1). All workers have the right to a safe and healthy environment at work. Work can protect mental health. Decent work supports good mental health by providing:
For people with mental health conditions, decent work can contribute to recovery and inclusion, improve confidence and social functioning. Safe and healthy working environments are not only a fundamental right but are also more likely to minimize tension and conflicts at work and improve staff retention, work performance and productivity. Conversely, a lack of effective structures and support at work, especially for those living with mental health conditions, can affect a person’s ability to enjoy their work and do their job well; it can undermine people’s attendance at work and even stop people getting a job in the first place.
At work, risks to mental health, also called psychosocial risks, may be related to job content or work schedule, specific characteristics of the workplace or opportunities for career development among other things. Risks to mental health at work can include:
More than half the global workforce works in the informal economy (2), where there is no regulatory protection for health and safety. These workers often operate in unsafe working environments, work long hours, have little or no access to social or financial protections and face discrimination, all of which can undermine mental health.
Although psychosocial risks can be found in all sectors, some workers are more likely to be exposed to them than others, because of what they do or where and how they work. Health, humanitarian or emergency workers often have jobs that carry an elevated risk of exposure to adverse events, which can negatively impact mental health.
Economic recessions or humanitarian and public health emergencies elicit risks such as job loss, financial instability, reduced employment opportunities or increased unemployment.
Work can be a setting which amplifies wider issues that negatively affect mental health, including discrimination and inequality based on factors such as, race, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, disability, social origin, migrant status, religion or age.
People with severe mental health conditions are more likely to be excluded from employment, and when in employment, they are more likely to experience inequality at work. Being out of work also poses a risk to mental health. Unemployment, job and financial insecurity, and recent job loss are risk factors for suicide attempts.
Government, employers, the organizations which represent workers and employers, and other stakeholders responsible for workers’ health and safety can help to improve mental health at work through action to:
Action to address mental health at work should be done with the meaningful involvement of workers and their representatives, and persons with lived experience of mental health conditions.
Preventing mental health conditions at work is about managing psychosocial risks in the workplace. WHO recommends employers do this by implementing organizational interventions that directly target working conditions and environments. Organizational interventions are those that assess, and then mitigate, modify or remove workplace risks to mental health. Organizational interventions include, for example, providing flexible working arrangements, or implementing frameworks to deal with violence and harassment at work.
Protecting and promoting mental health at work is about strengthening capacities to recognize and act on mental health conditions at work, particularly for persons responsible for the supervision of others, such as managers.
To protect mental health, WHO recommends:
People living with mental health conditions have a right to participate in work fully and fairly. The UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities provides an international agreement for promoting the rights of people with disabilities , including at work. WHO recommends three interventions to support people with mental health conditions gain, sustain and participate in work:
Both governments and employers, in consultation with key stakeholders, can help improve mental health at work by creating an enabling environment for change. In practice this means strengthening:
WHO is committed to improving mental health at work. The WHO global strategy on health, environment and climate change and WHO Comprehensive mental health action plan outline relevant principles, objectives and implementation strategies to enable good mental health in the workplace. These include addressing social determinants of mental health, such as living standards and working conditions; reducing stigma and discrimination; and increasing access to evidence-based care through health service development, including access to occupational health services. In 2022, WHO’s World mental health report: transforming mental health for all, highlighted the workplace as a key example of a setting where transformative action on mental health is needed. The WHO guidelines on mental health at work provide evidence-based recommendations to promote mental health, prevent mental health conditions, and enable people living with mental health conditions to participate and thrive in work. The recommendations cover organizational interventions, manager training and worker training, individual interventions, return to work, and gaining employment. The accompanying policy brief by WHO and the International Labour Organization, Mental health at work: policy brief provides a pragmatic framework for implementing the WHO recommendations. It specifically sets out what governments, employers, organizations representing employers and workers, and other stakeholders can do to improve mental health at work.
Related
News
Fact sheets

========================================
mental-health-in-emergencies
========================================
Every year, millions of people are affected by emergencies such as armed conflicts and natural disasters. These crises disrupt families, livelihoods and essential services, and significantly impact mental health. Nearly all those affected experience psychological distress. A minority go on to develop mental health conditions such as depression or post-traumatic stress disorder. Emergencies can worsen mental health conditions and social issues such as poverty and discrimination. They can also contribute to new problems, such as family separation and harmful substance use. International guidelines recommend various activities for providing mental health and psychosocial support during emergencies, ranging from community self-help and communications to psychological first aid and clinical mental health care. Preparedness and integration with disaster risk reduction are essential to mitigate impacts. Countries can also use emergencies as opportunities to invest in mental health, leveraging the increased aid and attention they receive to develop better care systems for the long term.
Social problems
Mental health problems
Problems obtaining mental health services Most people affected by emergencies experience feelings of anxiety, sadness, hopelessness, sleep issues, fatigue, irritability, anger or aches. This psychological distress usually improves over time, but some people go on to develop a mental health condition. An estimated 22% may have depression, anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder, bipolar disorder or schizophrenia (1). An estimated 13% of conflict-affected populations have mild forms of depression, anxiety and post-traumatic stress disorder, while moderate or severe mental disorders affect 9%.
In conflict-affected settings, depression increases with age and is more common in women. People with severe conditions are especially vulnerable during and after emergencies and need access to basic needs and clinical care. International guidelines on MHPSS recommend several actions to effectively prepare and respond to emergencies (2). Mental health is crucial to the social and economic recovery of individuals, communities and countries after emergencies. And despite the adversity they create, emergencies also offer opportunities to build better mental health systems – by leveraging the surge of aid and focused attention for long-term service development. Many countries have done just this, even in challenging circumstances. WHO works globally to ensure that mental health emergency preparedness and response is both coordinated and effective, and that after emergencies, all efforts are made to strengthen mental health services for the long term. WHO leads in providing technical advice on mental health in emergencies, operating in a range of countries and territories such as Afghanistan, Chad, the occupied Palestinian territory and Yemen. In 2024, WHO and partners supported the Ukrainian MHPSS operational roadmap, coordinating more than 250 actors and national authorities to significantly scale up mental health services.
In 2024, the World Health Assembly approved a resolution to strengthen MHPSS in all stages of emergencies and provide integrated, quality mental health services which are accessible to all. It urges Member States to implement the WHO Comprehensive Mental Health Action Plan 2013–2030, and make long-term investments in community-based services and cross-sectoral coordination. WHO co-chairs the IASC MHPSS Reference Group, supporting organizations and technical working groups in more than 55 countries. Through this group, WHO also collaborates with the Standby Partners Network to rapidly deploy technical experts during significant and complex emergencies. WHO works with diverse partners to develop tools and resources, including the MHPSS Minimum Services Package, which are widely used to improve the scale and quality of emergency mental health responses. WHO also builds capacities for MHPSS preparedness and disaster risk management, including by hosting global workshops that include first of their kind, full-scale multisectoral field-based simulation exercises. References
Related
Fact sheets
Feature stories

========================================
adolescent-mental-health
========================================
One in six people are aged 10–19 years. Adolescence is a unique and formative time. Physical, emotional and social changes, including exposure to poverty, abuse, or violence, can make adolescents vulnerable to mental health problems. Protecting adolescents from adversity, promoting socio-emotional learning and psychological well-being, and ensuring access to mental health care are critical for their health and well-being during adolescence and adulthood.
Globally, it is estimated that one in seven of 10–19-year-olds experience mental health conditions (1), yet these remain largely unrecognized and untreated.
Adolescents with mental health conditions are particularly vulnerable to social exclusion, discrimination, stigma , educational difficulties, risk-taking behaviours, physical ill-health and human rights violations.
Adolescence is a crucial period for developing social and emotional habits important for mental well-being. These include adopting healthy sleep patterns; exercising regularly; developing coping, problem-solving, and interpersonal skills; and learning to manage emotions. Protective and supportive environments in the family, at school and in the wider community are important.
Multiple factors affect mental health. The more risk factors adolescents are exposed to, the greater the potential impact on their mental health. Factors that can contribute to stress during adolescence include exposure to adversity, pressure to conform with peers and exploration of identity. Media influence and gender norms can exacerbate the disparity between an adolescent’s lived reality and their perceptions or aspirations for the future. Other important determinants include the quality of their home life and relationships with peers. Violence , harsh parenting and severe and socioeconomic problems are recognized risks to mental health.
Some adolescents are at greater risk of mental health conditions due to their living conditions, stigma, discrimination or exclusion, or lack of access to quality support and services. These include adolescents living in humanitarian and fragile settings; adolescents with chronic illness, autism spectrum disorder, an intellectual disability or other neurological condition; pregnant adolescents, adolescent parents, or those in early or forced marriages; orphans; and adolescents from minority ethnic or sexual backgrounds or other discriminated groups.
Emotional disorders are common among adolescents. Anxiety disorders are the most prevalent in this age group and are more common among older than among younger adolescents. It is estimated that 4.4% of 10–14-year-olds and 5.5% of 15–19-year-olds experience an anxiety disorder (1). Depression is estimated to occur among 1.4% of adolescents aged 10–14 years, and 3.5% of 15–19-year-olds (1). Depression and anxiety share some of the same symptoms, including rapid and unexpected changes in mood.
Anxiety and depressive disorders can profoundly affect school attendance and schoolwork. Social withdrawal can exacerbate isolation and loneliness. Depression can lead to suicide.
Behavioural disorders are more common among younger adolescents than older adolescents. Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder , characterized by difficulty paying attention and/or excessive activity and acting without regard to consequences, occurs among 2.9% of 10–14-year-olds and 2.2% of 15–19-year-olds (1). Conduct disorder occurs among 3.5% of 10–14-year-olds and 1.9% of 15–19-year-olds (1). Behavioural disorders can affect adolescents’ education and increases the risk of criminal behaviour.
Eating disorders, such as anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa, commonly emerge during adolescence and young adulthood. Eating disorders involve abnormal eating behaviour and preoccupation with food, accompanied in most instances by concerns about body weight and shape. Girls are more commonly affected than boys. Eating disorders can affect physical health and often co-exist with depression, anxiety and substance use disorders. They occur in an estimated 0.1% of 10–14-year-olds and and 0.4% of 15–19-year-olds (1). They are associated with suicide. Anorexia nervosa can lead to premature death, often due to medical complications or suicide, and has higher mortality than any other mental disorder.
Conditions that include symptoms of psychosis most commonly emerge in late adolescence or early adulthood. Symptoms can include hallucinations or delusions. These experiences can impair an adolescent’s ability to participate in daily life and education and often lead to stigma or human rights violations. Schizophrenia occurs in 0.1% of 15–19-year-olds (1).
Suicide is the third leading cause of death in older adolescents and young adults (2). Risk factors for suicide are multifaceted, and include harmful use of alcohol, abuse in childhood, stigma against help-seeking, barriers to accessing care and access to means of suicide. Digital media, like any other media, can play a significant role in either enhancing or weakening suicide prevention efforts.
Many risk-taking behaviours for health, such as substance use or sexual risk-taking, start during adolescence. Risk-taking behaviours can be an unhelpful strategy to cope with emotional difficulties and can severely impact an adolescent’s mental and physical well-being.
Young people are especially vulnerable to developing harmful substance use patterns that can persist across the lifespan. In 2019, the prevalence of alcohol use among 15–19-year-olds was high worldwide with very few gender differences, and showing an increase in consumption in some regions (3).
The use of tobacco and cannabis are additional concerns. Many adult smokers had their first cigarette prior to the age of 18 years. In 2022, the prevalence of cannabis use among adolescents was higher than that of adults globally (4).
Perpetration of violence is a risk-taking behaviour that can increase the likelihood of low educational attainment, injury, involvement with crime or death. Interpersonal violence was ranked among the leading causes of death of older adolescents in 2021 (1).
Mental health promotion and prevention interventions aim to strengthen an individual's capacity to regulate emotions, enhance alternatives to risk-taking behaviours, build resilience for managing difficult situations and adversity, and promote supportive social environments and social networks.
These programmes require a multi-level approach with varied delivery platforms – for example, digital media, health or social care settings, schools or the community – and varied strategies to reach adolescents, particularly the most vulnerable.
It is crucial to address the needs of adolescents with mental health conditions. Avoiding institutionalization and over-medicalization, prioritizing non-pharmacological approaches, and respecting the rights of children in line with the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child and other human rights instruments are key for adolescents’ mental health.
WHO works on strategies, programmes and tools to assist governments in responding to the health needs of adolescents.
For example, the Helping Adolescents Thrive Initiative is a joint WHO-UNICEF effort to strengthen policies and programmes for the mental health of adolescents. More specifically, the efforts made through the Initiative are to promote mental health and prevent mental health conditions. They are also intended to help prevent self-harm and other risk behaviours, such as harmful use of alcohol and drugs, that have a negative impact on the mental ̶ and physical ̶ health of young people.
WHO has also developed a module on Child and Adolescent Mental and Behavioural Disorders as part of the mhGAP Intervention Guide 2.0. This Guide provides evidence-based clinical protocols for the assessment and management of a range of mental health conditions in non-specialized care settings.
Furthermore, WHO is developing and testing scalable psychological interventions to address emotional disorders of adolescents, and guidance on mental health services for adolescents.
WHO’s Regional Office for the Eastern Mediterranean has developed a mental health training package for educators for improved understanding of the importance of mental health in the school setting and to guide the implementation of strategies to promote, protect and restore mental health among their students. It includes training manuals and materials to help scale up the number of schools promoting mental health.
(1) Institute of health Metrics and Evaluation. Global Health Data Exchange (2) WHO Global Health Estimates 2000-2021
(3) Global status report on alcohol and health and treatment of substance use disorders 2024 (4) World Drug Report. Geneva: UNODC; 2024(
Related
Comprehensive Mental Health Action Plan 2013-2030 Guidelines on promotive and preventative mental health interventions for adolescents Mental Health Gap Action Programme Intervention Guide 2.0
LIVE LIFE: an implementation guide for suicide prevention in countries
Mental health in schools: a manual Global Strategy for Women’s, Children’s and Adolescents’ Health 2016–2030
Improving the mental and brain health of children and adolescents
News
Fact sheets

========================================
mental-health-of-older-adults
========================================
The world’s population is ageing fast. In 2020, 1 billion people in the world were aged 60 years or over. That figure will rise to 1.4 billion by 2030, representing one in six people globally. By 2050, the number of people aged 60 years and over will have doubled to reach 2.1 billion. The number of persons aged 80 years or older is expected to triple between 2020 and 2050 to reach 426 million (1).
Older adults contribute to society as family and community members, and many are volunteers and workers. While most have good health, many are at risk of developing mental health conditions such as depression and anxiety disorders. Many may also experience reduced mobility, chronic pain, frailty, dementia or other health problems, for which they require some form of long-term care. As people age, they are more likely to experience several conditions at the same time. Around 14% of adults aged 60 and over live with a mental disorder (2). According to the Global Health Estimates 2019, these conditions account for 10.6% of the total disability among older adults. The most common mental health conditions for older adults are depression and anxiety. GHE 2019 shows that globally, around a quarter of deaths from suicide are among people aged 60 or over. Mental health conditions among older people are often underrecognized and undertreated, and the stigma surrounding these conditions can make people reluctant to seek help.
At older ages, mental health is shaped not only by physical and social environments but also by the cumulative impacts of earlier life experiences and specific stressors related to ageing. Exposure to adversity, significant loss in intrinsic capacity and a decline in functional ability can all result in psychological distress.
Older adults are more likely to experience adverse events such as bereavement, or a drop in income or reduced sense of purpose with retirement. Despite their many contributions to society, many older adults are subject to ageism, which can seriously affect people’s mental health. Social isolation and loneliness, which affect about a quarter of older people, are key risk factors for mental health conditions in later life (3). So too is abuse of older people, which includes any kind of physical, verbal, psychological, sexual or financial abuse, as well as neglect. One in six older adults experience abuse, often by their own carers (4). Abuse of older adults has serious consequences and can lead to depression and anxiety. Many older people are carers of spouses with chronic health conditions, such as dementia. The responsibilities of such care can be overwhelming and can affect the carer’s mental health. Some older adults are at greater risk of depression and anxiety, because of dire living conditions, poor physical health or lack of access to quality support and services. This includes older adults living in humanitarian settings and those living with chronic illnesses , neurological conditions , or substance use problems.
Mental health promotion and prevention strategies for older adults focus on supporting healthy ageing. That means creating physical and social environments that support well-being and enable people to do what is important to them, despite losses in capacity. Key mental health promotion and prevention strategies for healthy ageing include:
For older adults, social connection is particularly important to reduce risk factors such as social isolation and loneliness. At this stage of life, meaningful social activities can significantly improve positive mental health, life satisfaction and quality of life; they can also reduce depressive symptoms. Example interventions include befriending initiatives, community and support groups, social skills training, creative arts groups, leisure and education services and volunteering programmes.
Protection from ageism and abuse is also critical. Key interventions include anti-discrimination policies and laws, educational interventions and intergenerational activities. A range of carer interventions – including respite care, advice, education, financial support and psychological interventions – can support carers to maintain a good and healthy caring relationship that avoids abuse of older people.
Prompt recognition and treatment of mental health conditions in older adults is essential. This should follow standards for integrated care for older people, which is community-based and focused on both the long-term care of older adults living with mental health conditions and declines in intrinsic capacity, as well as the education, training and support of carers. A mix of mental health interventions are usually recommended, alongside other supports to address the health, personal care and social needs of individuals. Dementia is often an important concern. It affects people’s mental health , and requires access to quality mental health care. Responding to the abuse of older adults is also critical. Promising interventions include mandatory reporting of abuse, self-help groups, helplines and emergency shelters, psychological programmes for abusers, training of health care providers and other caregiver support interventions. WHO works with diverse partners on strategies, programmes and tools to support governments respond to the mental health needs of older adults. For example, the Decade of Healthy Ageing is a global collaboration led by WHO to improve the lives of older people, their families and the communities in which they live. WHO Member States have also endorsed the Comprehensive mental health action plan 2013–2030, which supports improved mental health and mental health care for all populations, including older adults. WHO’s Mental Health Gap Action Programme provides evidence-based clinical protocols for assessing, managing and following up a set of priority mental, neurological and substance use conditions in non-specialized settings, including depression and dementia. The mhGAP intervention guide includes clinical tips for working with older adults. During the COVID-19 pandemic, WHO and partners in the Inter-Agency-Standing Committee developed the Living with the times toolkit of illustrated posters to help older adults maintain good mental health and well-being. Other WHO activities to support the mental health of older adults include the development of scalable psychological interventions to address depression and anxiety, research and guidance on interventions to reduce social isolation and loneliness, and cost–effective solutions to prevent abuse of older adults.
References
Related
Fact sheets

========================================
musculoskeletal-conditions
========================================
Musculoskeletal health refers to the performance of the locomotor system, comprising intact muscles, bones, joints and adjacent connective tissues. Musculoskeletal impairments comprise more than 150 different diseases/conditions that affect the system and are characterized by impairments in the muscles, bones, joints and adjacent connective tissues leading to temporary or lifelong limitations in functioning and participation. Musculoskeletal conditions are typically characterized by pain and limitations in mobility and dexterity, reducing people’s ability to work and participate in society. Pain experienced in musculoskeletal structures is the most common form of non-cancer pain.
Musculoskeletal conditions are relevant across the life-course – from childhood to older age. They range from those conditions that arise suddenly and are short-lived though to long-term conditions such as chronic primary low back pain and osteoarthritis.
Musculoskeletal conditions include conditions that affect:
Musculoskeletal conditions are also the highest contributor to the global need for rehabilitation. They are among the largest contributors to the need for rehabilitation services among children and account for approximately two-thirds of all adults in need of rehabilitation (1). Musculoskeletal conditions often co-exist with other noncommunicable diseases and increase the risk of developing other noncommunicable diseases, such as cardiovascular disease (2). People with musculoskeletal conditions are also at higher risk to develop mental health issues.
A recent analysis of Global Burden of Disease 2019 data showed that approximately 1.71 billion people globally live with musculoskeletal conditions, including low back pain, neck pain, fractures, other injuries, osteoarthritis, amputation and rheumatoid arthritis (1). While the prevalence of musculoskeletal conditions varies by age and diagnosis, people of all ages everywhere around the world are affected. High-income countries are the most affected in terms of number of people – 441 million – followed by countries in the WHO Western Pacific Region with 427 million and South-East Asia Region with 369 million. Musculoskeletal conditions are also the biggest contributor to years lived with disability worldwide with approximately 149 million YLDs, accounting for 17% of all YLDs worldwide.
Low back pain is the main contributor to the overall burden of musculoskeletal conditions . Other contributors to the overall burden of musculoskeletal conditions include fractures with 440 million people globally , osteoarthritis , neck pain , amputations , rheumatoid arthritis , gout other musculoskeletal conditions [data from IHME Viz Hub and WHO Rehabilitation Needs Estimator].
While the prevalence of musculoskeletal conditions increases with age, younger people are also affected, often during their peak income-earning years. For example, childhood auto-immune inflammatory conditions such as juvenile arthritis affect children’s development, while low back pain is the main reason for a premature exit from the workforce. The societal impact of early retirement in terms of direct health-care costs and indirect costs is enormous. Projections show that the number of people with low back pain will increase in the future, and even more rapidly in low-income and middle-income countries (3).
The WHO Rehabilitation Need Estimator tool provides a unique opportunity to search for country, regional or global prevalence and YLD data on musculoskeletal conditions that can benefit from rehabilitation, based on GBD 2019 data. Similarly, the GBD Compare Tool also provides health estimates for musculoskeletal and other conditions. Variation in aggregated health estimates between the tools may be explained by differences in which specific musculoskeletal conditions and subgroups of those are included.
The WHO Ageing Data Portal brings together data on available global indicators relevant to monitoring the health and well-being of people aged 60 years and over. Through maps, charts and tables, the portal offers tailored options for visualization and analysis of the data. The portal provides prevalence data for low back pain in older people.
Rehabilitation 2030
WHO launched the Rehabilitation 2030 initiative in 2017 to draw attention to the profound unmet need for rehabilitation worldwide, and to highlight the importance of strengthening rehabilitation in health systems. The initiative marks a new strategic approach for the global rehabilitation community by emphasizing that:
WHO is also developing a Package of Interventions for Rehabilitation including the following musculoskeletal conditions: low back pain, osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, sarcopenia, fractures in the extremities, and amputation. Each package will contain a list of essential interventions for rehabilitation and the resources required to deliver them safely and effectively. These interventions will be relevant for people at all stages of life, along the continuum of care, across all service delivery platforms, and across all world regions, with a specific focus on low- and middle-resource contexts.
The main target users of the Package of Interventions for Rehabilitation are Ministries of Health that can use this resource to plan and budget the integration of rehabilitation in their national health services. Other target users that may benefit from the Package of Interventions for Rehabilitation include researchers to identify rehabilitation research gaps; academics to develop curricula for the training of rehabilitation professionals; and service providers to plan and implement specific interventions in their rehabilitation programmes.
More about the Package of Interventions for Rehabilitation of musculoskeletal conditions can be foundhere.
Integrated Care for Older People Integrated care for older people reflects a continuum of care that helps to reorient health and social services towards a more person-centred and coordinated model of care to optimize older people’s intrinsic capacity and functional ability. Locomotor capacity is a key component of intrinsic capacity. Delivery of integrated care and primary health services responsive to older people is one of the action areas of UN Decade of Healthy Ageing . WHO has developed tools to support countries for implementation of the ICOPE approach that include:
WHO is currently developing evidence-based clinical guidelines for non-surgical management of chronic primary low back pain for adults. The recommendations to manage chronic primary low back pain will be integrated into ICOPE handbook.
Related
Fact sheets
More
Violence and Injury PreventionDisabilityRehabilitationOccupational healthPhysical activityNoncommunicable diseases and their risk factors

========================================
ionizing-radiation-and-health-effects
========================================
Ionizing radiation is a type of energy released by atoms that travels in the form of electromagnetic waves or particles . The spontaneous disintegration of atoms is called radioactivity, and the excess energy emitted is a form of ionizing radiation. Unstable elements which disintegrate and emit ionizing radiation are called radionuclides.
The activity — used as a measure of the amount of a radionuclide present — is expressed in a unit called the becquerel (Bq): one becquerel is one disintegration per second. The half-life is the time required for the activity of a radionuclide to decrease by decay to half of its initial value. The half-life of a radioactive element is the time that it takes for one half of its atoms to disintegrate. This can range from a mere fraction of a second to millions of years .
People are exposed to natural radiation sources as well as human-made sources on a daily basis. Natural radiation comes from many sources including more than 60 naturally-occurring radioactive materials found in soil, water and air. Radon, a naturally-occurring gas, emanates from rock and soil and is the main source of natural radiation. Every day, people inhale and ingest radionuclides from air, food and water.
People are also exposed to natural radiation from cosmic rays, particularly at high altitude. On average, 80% of the annual dose of background radiation that a person receives is due to naturally occurring terrestrial and cosmic radiation sources. Background radiation levels vary geographically due to geological differences. Exposure in certain areas can be more than 200 times higher than the global average.
Exposure to radiation also comes from human-made sources ranging from nuclear power generation to medical uses of radiation for diagnosis or treatment. Today, the most common human-made sources of ionizing radiation are medical devices, including x-ray machines and Computed Tomography (CT) scanners.
Exposure to radiation may occur through internal or external pathways.
Internal exposure to ionizing radiation occurs when a radionuclide is inhaled, ingested or otherwise enters into the bloodstream . Internal exposure stops when the radionuclide is eliminated from the body, either spontaneously or as a result of a treatment.
Exposure to ionizing radiation can be classified for radiation protection purposes into three exposure situations, i.e. planned, existing and emergency situations. Planned exposure situations result from the deliberate introduction and operation of radiation sources with specific purposes, as is the case with the medical use of radiation for diagnosis or treatment of patients, or the use of radiation in industry or research. Existing exposure occurs where radiation already exists and a decision on control must be taken – for example, exposure to radon in homes or workplaces or exposure to natural background radiation from the environment. Emergency exposure situations result from unexpected events requiring prompt response, such as nuclear accidents or malicious acts.
Medical use of radiation accounts for 98 % of the population dose contribution from all human-made sources, and represents 20% of the total population exposure. Annually worldwide, more than 4200 million diagnostic radiology examinations are performed, 40 million nuclear medicine procedures are carried out, and 8.5 million radiotherapy treatments are given.
Radiation damage to tissue and/or organs depends on the dose of radiation received, or the absorbed dose which is expressed in a unit called the gray (Gy). The potential damage from an absorbed dose depends on the type of radiation and the sensitivity of the different tissues and organs.
The effective dose is used to measure ionizing radiation in terms of the potential for causing harm. The sievert (Sv) is the unit of effective dose that takes into account the type of radiation and sensitivity of tissues and organs. It is a way to measure ionizing radiation in terms of the potential for causing harm. In addition to the amount of radiation , the rate at which the dose is delivered , described in microsieverts per hour or millisievert per year , is an important parameter.
Beyond certain thresholds, radiation can impair the functioning of tissues and/or organs and can produce acute effects such as skin redness, hair loss, radiation burns, or acute radiation syndrome. These effects are more severe at higher doses and higher dose rates. For instance, the dose threshold for acute radiation syndrome is about 1 Sv .
If the radiation dose is low and/or it is delivered over a long period of time , the risk is substantially low because there is a greater likelihood of repairing the damage. There is still a risk of long-term effects such as cataract or cancer, however, that may appear years or even decades later. Effects of this type will not always occur, but their likelihood is proportional to the radiation dose. This risk is higher for children and adolescents as they are significantly more sensitive to radiation exposure than adults.
Epidemiological studies on populations exposed to radiation, such as the survivors of the atomic bombings or radiotherapy patients, showed a significant increase of cancer risk at doses above 100 mSv. More recently, some epidemiological studies in individuals exposed to medical exposure during childhood have suggested that cancer risk may increase even at lower doses .
Prenatal exposure to ionizing radiation may induce brain damage in foetuses following an acute dose exceeding 100 mSv between weeks 8-15 of pregnancy and 200 mSv between weeks 16-25 of pregnancy. Before week 8 or after week 25 of pregnancy human studies have not shown radiation risk to fetal brain development. Epidemiological studies indicate that the cancer risk after fetal exposure to radiation is similar to the risk after exposure in early childhood.
WHO works to strengthen radiation protection of patients, workers and the public worldwide. It provides Member States with evidence-based guidance, tools and technical advice on public health issues related to ionizing radiation. Focusing on public health aspects of radiation protection, WHO covers activities related to radiation risk assessment, management and communication.
In line with its core function on “setting norms and standards and promoting and monitoring their implementation”, WHO contributed to the development, co-sponsored and endorsed the latest version of the International Basic Safety Standards with 7 other international organizations, and is currently working to support the implementation of the BSS in its Member States.
Related

========================================
japanese-encephalitis
========================================
Japanese encephalitis virus is an important cause of viral encephalitis in Asia. It is a mosquito-borne flavivirus and belongs to the same genus as dengue, Zika, yellow fever and West Nile viruses. The first case of Japanese encephalitis viral disease (JE) was documented in 1871 in Japan. The annual incidence of clinical disease varies both across and within endemic countries, ranging from 10 per 100 000 population or higher during outbreaks. A literature review and modelling study estimates about 100 000 clinical cases of JE globally each year, with approximately 25 000 deaths . JE primarily affects children. Most adults in endemic countries have natural immunity after childhood infection, but individuals of any age may be affected.
Most JEV infections are mild or without apparent symptoms, but approximately 1 in 250 infections results in severe clinical illness. The incubation period is 4–14 days. In children, gastrointestinal pain and vomiting may be the dominant initial symptoms. Severe disease is characterized by rapid onset of high fever, headache, neck stiffness, disorientation, coma, seizures, spastic paralysis and ultimately death. The case fatality rate can be as high as 30% among those with disease symptoms. Of those who survive, 20–30% suffer permanent cognitive, behavioural or neurological sequelae such as seizures, hearing or vision loss, speech, language, memory, and communication problems or weakness of the limbs. Twenty-four countries in the WHO South-East Asia and Western Pacific Regions have JEV transmission risk, which includes more than 3 billion people. JEV is transmitted to humans through bites from infected mosquitoes of the Culex species . Humans, once infected, do not develop sufficient viraemia to infect feeding mosquitoes. The virus exists in a transmission cycle between mosquitoes, pigs and/or water birds . The disease is predominantly found in rural and periurban settings, where humans live in closer proximity to these vertebrate hosts, in particular domestic pigs. In most temperate areas of Asia, JEV is transmitted mainly during the warm season, when large epidemics can occur. In the tropics and subtropics, transmission can occur year-round but often intensifies during the rainy season and pre-harvest period in rice-cultivating regions.
Individuals who live in or have travelled to a JE-endemic area and experience encephalitis are considered a suspected JE case. Initial diagnosis of JE can be made by clinical examination followed by a lumbar puncture. A laboratory test is required to confirm JEV infection and to rule out other causes of encephalitis. WHO recommends testing for JEV-specific IgM antibody in a single sample of cerebrospinal fluid or serum, using an IgM-capture ELISA. If tested negative, a convalescent sample may be tested. Testing of CSF sample is preferred to reduce false-positivity rates from previous infection or vaccination.
Surveillance of the disease is mostly syndromic for acute encephalitis syndrome. Confirmatory laboratory testing is often conducted in dedicated sentinel sites, and efforts are undertaken to expand laboratory-based surveillance. Case-based surveillance is established in countries that effectively control JE through vaccination.
Encephalitis is a medical emergency and requires urgent medical attention. There is no antiviral treatment for patients with JE. Treatment is supportive and includes stabilization and relief of symptoms. Those who have lived through encephalitis often have health-care needs requiring long-term treatment and care including rehabilitation. The ongoing psychosocial impacts of disability from encephalitis can have medical, educational, social and human rights-based implications. Despite the high burden of sequelae on people with encephalitis, their families and the community, access to both services and support for these conditions is often insufficient, especially in low- and middle-income countries. Individuals and families with members disabled by encephalitis should be encouraged to seek services and guidance from local and national Organizations of Disabled People and other disability focused organizations, which can provide vital advice about legal rights, economic opportunities and social engagement to ensure people disabled by encephalitis are able to live full and rewarding lives.
Progress has been made in Asia with the implementation of JE vaccination programmes, with most endemic countries having country-wide or targeted programmes in place. A decline in incidence of the disease has been reported in recent years, which is likely due in part to vaccination. Gavi supports JE catch-up campaigns and co-finances the vaccine for routine immunization in eligible countries.
Safe and effective JE vaccines are available to prevent disease. WHO recommends having strong JE prevention and control activities, including JE immunization in all regions where the disease is a recognized public health priority, along with strengthening surveillance and reporting mechanisms. Even if the number of JE-confirmed cases is low, vaccination should be considered where there is a suitable environment for JE virus transmission. Introduction of the vaccine should be done in conjunction with a one-time catch-up campaign.
There are three main types of JE vaccines currently in use: several inactivated Vero cell-derived vaccines, a live attenuated vaccine, and a live recombinant vaccine. One inactivated vaccine and the two live vaccines are WHO prequalified.
The risk to travellers to Japanese encephalitis-endemic areas is normally low, but travellers should take precautions to avoid mosquito bites. Personal preventive measures include the use of mosquito repellents, long-sleeved clothes, coils and vaporizers. Travellers spending extensive time in JE endemic areas are recommended to get vaccinated before travel.
In endemic areas, there is little evidence to support a reduction in JE disease burden from interventions other than the vaccination of humans. Thus, vaccination of humans should be prioritized over vaccination of pigs and mosquito control measures. However, the spread of JEV in new areas has been correlated with agricultural development and intensive rice cultivation supported by irrigation programmes.
WHO responds to Japanese encephalitis in the following way:
References
1. Quan et al., https://elifesciences.org/articles/51027
Related
Feature stories
More
Map: Japanese encephalitis
Click to enlarge

========================================
marburg-virus-disease
========================================
Marburg virus and Ravn virus of the species Orthomarburgvirus marburgense are the causative agents of Marburg virus disease . The disease has a case fatality ratio of up to 88%, but it can be much lower with good and early patient care. Both viruses are part of the Filoviridae family to which Orthoebolavirus genus belongs. Though caused by different viruses, Ebola and Marburg diseases are clinically similar. Both diseases are rare but have the capacity to cause outbreaks with high fatality rates.
MVD was initially detected in 1967 after two simultaneous outbreaks in Marburg and Frankfurt in Germany, and in Belgrade, Serbia. These outbreaks were associated with laboratory work using African green monkeys imported from Uganda. Subsequently, outbreaks and sporadic cases have been reported in Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, South Africa , Tanzania and Uganda. In 2008, two independent cases were reported in travellers who had visited a cave inhabited by Rousettus aegyptiacus bat colonies in Uganda. In September 2024, Rwanda reported the country's first outbreak and Tanzania declared another outbreak in January 2025.
Initially, human MVD infection results from prolonged exposure to mines or caves inhabited by Rousettus fruit bat colonies.
Once introduced in the human population, Marburg virus can spread through human-to-human transmission via direct contact with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected people, and with surfaces and materials contaminated with these fluids.
Healthcare workers have frequently been infected while treating patients with MVD. This has occurred through close contact with patients when infection control precautions are not strictly practiced. Transmission via contaminated injection equipment or through needle-stick injuries is associated with more severe disease, rapid deterioration, and possibly a higher fatality rate.
Burial ceremonies that involve direct contact with the body of the deceased can also contribute to the transmission of Marburg virus.
People cannot transmit the disease before they have symptoms and remain infectious as long as their blood contains the virus.
The incubation period varies from 2 to 21 days.
MVD begins abruptly, with high fever, severe headache and severe malaise. Muscle aches and pains are a common feature. Severe watery diarrhoea, abdominal pain and cramping, nausea and vomiting can begin on the third day. Non-itchy rash have been reported in patients between 2 and 7 days after onset of symptoms.
From day 5 of the disease, patients may develop haemorrhagic manifestations, including fresh blood in vomitus and faeces, and bleeding from the nose, gums and vagina. Bleeding at venepuncture sites can also be observed. Involvement of the central nervous system can result in confusion, irritability and aggression. Orchitis has been reported occasionally in the late phase of disease.
In fatal cases, death occurs most often between 8 and 9 days after symptom onset, usually preceded by severe blood loss and shock.
It can be difficult to clinically distinguish MVD from other infectious diseases such as malaria, typhoid fever, shigellosis, meningitis and other viral haemorrhagic fevers. Confirmation that symptoms are caused by Marburg virus infection are made using the following diagnostic methods:
Samples collected from patients are an extreme biohazard risk; laboratory testing on non-inactivated samples should be conducted under maximum biological containment conditions. All non-inactivated biological specimens should be packaged using the triple packaging system when transported nationally and internationally.
Early intensive supportive care including rehydration and treatment of specific symptoms, can improve survival. Currently there are no vaccines or antiviral treatments approved for MVD.– There are candidate monoclonal antibodies and antivirals, along with candidate vaccines that can be evaluated in clinical trials. Rousettus aegyptiacus bats are considered natural hosts for Marburg virus. There is no apparent disease in these fruit bats. As a result, the geographic distribution of Marburg virus may overlap with the range of Rousettus bats.
African green monkeys imported from Uganda were the source of infection for humans during the first MVD outbreak.
Experimental inoculations in pigs with different Orthoebolavirus species indicated that pigs are susceptible to filovirus infection and shed the virus. Therefore, pigs should be considered as a potential amplifier host during MVD outbreaks. Precautionary measures are needed in pig farms in Africa to avoid pigs becoming infected through contact with fruit bats.
Community engagement is key to successfully controlling any outbreaks. Outbreak control relies on using a range of interventions, such as case management, surveillance and contact tracing, good laboratory service, infection prevention and control in health facilities, safe and dignified burials and social mobilization. Raising awareness of risk factors for MVD and protective measures that individuals can take is an effective way to reduce human transmission. Risk reduction messaging should focus on several factors:
Healthcare workers should always take standard precautions when caring for patients, regardless of their presumed diagnosis. These include basic hand hygiene, respiratory hygiene, use of personal protective equipment , safe injection practices and safe and dignified burial practices.
Healthcare workers caring for patients with suspected or confirmed MVD should apply extra infection control measures to prevent contact with the patient’s blood and body fluids and contaminated surfaces or materials such as clothing and bedding.
Laboratory workers are also at risk. Samples taken from humans and animals for investigation of Marburg virus infection should be handled by trained staff and processed in suitably equipped laboratories.
All survivors, their partners and families should be shown respect, dignity and compassion. WHO does not recommend isolation of male or female convalescent patients whose blood has been tested negative for Marburg virus. MVD survivors might suffer from both clinical and psychological sequelae. WHO encourages affected countries to consider the establishment of a survivor care programme to alleviate sequelae, support to community reintegration and offer counselling and biological testing.
Marburg virus is known to persist in immune-privileged sites in some people who have recovered. These sites include the testicles and the inside of the eye. Extrapolating from data on other filoviruses, the virus may persist in the placenta, amniotic fluid and foetus of women infected while pregnant and in breast milk of women infected while breastfeeding. Relapse-symptomatic illness in the absence of re-infection in someone who has recovered from MVD is a rare event but has been documented. Reasons for this phenomenon are not yet fully understood.
Marburg virus transmission via infected semen has been documented up to seven weeks after clinical recovery. To mitigate the risk of potential transmission via exposure to infected semen, a semen testing programme should be implemented to:
After obtention of two consecutive negative test results, MVD survivors can safely resume normal sexual practices with minimized risk of Marburg virus transmission. In the absence of semen testing programme, male survivors should follow safer sex practices for 12 months.
WHO aims to prevent MVD outbreaks by maintaining surveillance for MVD disease and supporting at-risk countries to develop preparedness plans. The following document provides overall guidance for control of Ebola and Marburg disease outbreaks:
When an outbreak is detected WHO responds by supporting surveillance, community engagement, case management, laboratory services, infection prevention and control, logistical support and training and assistance with safe burial practices.
Table: Chronology of major Marburg virus disease outbreaks
Related
News
Feature stories

========================================
measles
========================================
Measles is a highly contagious disease caused by a virus. It spreads easily when an infected person breathes, coughs or sneezes. It can cause severe disease, complications, and even death.
Measles can affect anyone but is most common in children.
Measles infects the respiratory tract and then spreads throughout the body. Symptoms include a high fever, cough, runny nose and a rash all over the body.
Being vaccinated is the best way to prevent getting sick with measles or spreading it to other people. The vaccine is safe and helps your body fight off the virus.
Before the introduction of measles vaccine in 1963 and widespread vaccination, major epidemics occurred approximately every two to three years and caused an estimated 2.6 million deaths each year.
An estimated 107 500 people died from measles in 2023 – mostly children under the age of five years, despite the availability of a safe and cost-effective vaccine.
Accelerated immunization activities by countries, WHO, the Measles & Rubella Partnership , and other international partners successfully prevented an estimated 60 million deaths between 2000–2023. Vaccination decreased an estimated measles deaths from 800 062 in 2000 to 107 500 in 2022 (1).
The COVID-19 pandemic led to setbacks in surveillance and immunization efforts. The suspension of immunization services and declines in immunization rates and surveillance across the globe left millions of children vulnerable to preventable diseases like measles.
No country is exempt from measles, and areas with low immunization encourage the virus to circulate, increasing the likelihood of outbreaks and putting all unvaccinated children at risk.
We must regain progress and achieve regional measles elimination targets, despite the COVID-19 pandemic. Immunization programs should be strengthened within primary healthcare, so efforts to reach all children with two measles vaccine doses should be accelerated. Countries should also implement robust surveillance systems to identify and close immunity gaps.
Symptoms of measles usually begin 10–14 days after exposure to the virus. A prominent rash is the most visible symptom.
Early symptoms usually last 4–7 days. They include:
The rash begins about 7–18 days after exposure, usually on the face and upper neck. It spreads over about 3 days, eventually to the hands and feet. It usually lasts 5–6 days before fading.
Most deaths from measles are from complications related to the disease.
Complications can include:
If a woman catches measles during pregnancy, this can be dangerous for the mother and can result in her baby being born prematurely with a low birth weight.
Complications are most common in children under 5 years and adults over age 30. They are more likely in children who are malnourished, especially those without enough vitamin A or with a weak immune system from HIV or other diseases. Measles itself also weakens the immune system and can make the body “forget” how to protect itself against infections, leaving children extremely vulnerable.
Any non-immune person can become infected. Unvaccinated young children and pregnant persons are at highest risk of severe measles complications.
Measles is still common, particularly in parts of Africa, the Middle East and Asia. The overwhelming majority of measles deaths occur in countries with low per capita incomes or weak health infrastructures that struggle to reach all children with immunization.
Damaged health infrastructure and health services in countries experiencing or recovering from a natural disaster or conflict interrupt routine immunization and overcrowding in residential camps increases the risk of infection. Children with malnutrition or other causes of a weak immune system are at highest risk of death from measles.
Measles is one of the world’s most contagious diseases, spread by contact with infected nasal or throat secretions or breathing the air that was breathed by someone with measles. The virus remains active and contagious in the air or on infected surfaces for up to two hours. For this reason, it is very infectious, and one person infected by measles can infect nine out of 10 of their unvaccinated close contacts. It can be transmitted by an infected person from four days prior to the onset of the rash to four days after the rash erupts.
Measles outbreaks can result in severe complications and deaths, especially among young, malnourished children. In countries close to measles elimination, cases imported from other countries remain an important source of infection.
There is no specific treatment for measles. Caregiving should focus on relieving symptoms, making the person comfortable and preventing complications. Drinking enough water and treatments for dehydration can replace fluids lost to diarrhoea or vomiting. Eating a healthy diet is also important.
Doctors may use antibiotics to treat pneumonia and ear and eye infections.
All children or adults with measles should receive two doses of vitamin A supplements, given 24 hours apart. This restores low vitamin A levels that occur even in well-nourished children. It can help prevent eye damage and blindness. Vitamin A supplements may also reduce the number of measles deaths.
Community-wide vaccination is the most effective way to prevent measles. All children should be vaccinated against measles. The vaccine is safe, effective and inexpensive.
Children should receive two doses of the vaccine to ensure they are immune. The first dose is usually given at 9 months of age in countries where measles is common and 12–15 months in other countries. A second dose should be given later in childhood, usually at 15–18 months.
The measles vaccine is given alone or often combined with vaccines for mumps, rubella and/or varicella.
Routine measles vaccination, combined with mass immunization campaigns in countries with high case rates are crucial for reducing global measles deaths. The measles vaccine has been in use for about 60 years and costs less than US$ 1 per child. The measles vaccine is also used in emergencies to stop outbreaks from spreading. The risk of measles outbreaks is particularly high amongst refugees, who should be vaccinated as soon as possible.
Combining vaccines slightly increases the cost but allows for shared delivery and administration costs and importantly, adds the benefit of protection against rubella, the most common vaccine preventable infection that can infect babies in the womb.
In 2023, 74% of children received both doses of the measles vaccine, and about 83% of the world's children received one dose of measles vaccine by their first birthday. Two doses of the vaccine are recommended to ensure immunity and prevent outbreaks, as not all children develop immunity from the first dose.
Approximately 22 million infants missed at least one dose of measles vaccine through routine immunization in 2023.
In 2020, WHO and global stakeholders endorsed the Immunization Agenda 2021–2030. The Agenda aims to achieve the regional targets as a core indicator of impact, positioning measles as a tracer of a health system’s ability to deliver essential childhood vaccines.
WHO published the Measles and rubella strategic framework in 2020, establishing seven necessary strategic priorities to achieve and sustain the regional measles and rubella elimination goals.
Without sustained attention, hard-fought gains can easily be lost. Where children are unvaccinated, outbreaks occur. Based on current trends of measles vaccination coverage and incidence, the WHO Strategic Advisory Group of Experts on Immunization concluded that measles elimination is under threat, as the disease resurged in numerous countries that achieved, or were close to achieving, elimination.
WHO continues to strengthen the Global Measles and Rubella Laboratory Network to ensure timely diagnosis of measles and track the virus’ spread to assist countries in coordinating targeted vaccination activities and reduce deaths from this vaccine-preventable disease.
The Immunization Agenda 2030 Measles & Rubella Partnership is a partnership led by the American Red Cross, United Nations Foundation, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention , Gavi, the Vaccines Alliance, the Gates Foundation, UNICEF and WHO, to achieve the IA2030 measles and rubella specific targets. Launched in 2001, as the Measles and Rubella Initiative, the revitalized Partnership is committed to ensuring no child dies from measles or is born with congenital rubella syndrome. The Partnership helps countries plan, fund and measure efforts to permanently stop measles and rubella
References
1. Minta AA, Ferrari M, Antoni S, et al. Progress Toward Measles Elimination — Worldwide, 2000–2023. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2024;73:1036–1042. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7345a4
Related
News
Feature stories
More
Health topic on measles

========================================
meningitis
========================================
Meningitis is the inflammation of the tissues surrounding the brain and spinal cord. It can be infectious or non-infectious in origin, can be associated with high risk of death and long-term complications, and requires urgent medical care.
Meningitis remains a significant global health threat. It can be caused by several species of bacteria, viruses, fungi and parasites. Injuries, cancers and drugs cause a small number of cases.
Bacterial meningitis is the most serious type of meningitis. It is a severe, life-threatening condition that can often lead to long-term adverse health consequences. There are four main causes of acute bacterial meningitis:
These bacteria are responsible for more than half of the deaths from meningitis globally and can cause other severe diseases like sepsis and pneumonia.
Additional important causes of meningitis worldwide include other bacteria species , viruses , fungi , and parasites . Meningitis can affect anyone anywhere, and at any age. The pathogens that cause it can vary, based on a person’s age and immune system, and level of exposure to risk, which can be influenced by their living conditions and geographical location.
Newborn babies are most at risk from Group B streptococcus, whereas children and adolescents are at most risk of meningococcus, pneumococcus and Haemophilus influenzae. Pneumococcus and meningococcus also account for most cases of bacterial meningitis among adults. Immunocompromised and/or people living with HIV are at increased risk of different types of meningitis. Globally, the highest burden of disease is seen in a region of sub-Saharan Africa, known as the African meningitis belt, which stretches from Senegal to Ethiopia, and is at high risk of recurrent epidemics of meningococcal meningitis.
Meningococcal meningitis outbreaks occur more frequently under special risk conditions, such as crowded settings where people are in close proximity, mining areas, mass gatherings, such as religious or sporting events, settings with refugees or displaced persons, closed institutions, military camps and areas with high migration, such as high-traffic markets and border areas.
The route of transmission varies by organism. Most bacteria that cause meningitis, including meningococcus, pneumococcus and Haemophilus influenzae, are carried in the human nose and throat. They are spread from person to person by respiratory droplets or throat secretions. Group B streptococcus is often carried in the human gut or vagina and can spread from mother to child around the time of birth.
Carriage of these organisms is usually harmless and contributes to building up immunity against infection, but the bacteria occasionally invade the body, causing meningitis, sepsis and other forms of invasive disease.
The symptoms of meningitis can differ based on the cause, how quickly the disease progresses, how long it lasts, brain involvement, and other serious complications like sepsis.
Common symptoms of meningitis are fever, neck stiffness, confusion or altered mental status, headache, sensitivity to light, nausea and vomiting. Less frequent symptoms include seizures, coma and neurological deficits, such as weakness of the limbs. Infants often have different symptoms compared to adults:
Some bacterial pathogens may also account for other symptoms as a result of bloodstream infection, which can quickly lead to sepsis, including cold hands and feet, fast breathing and low blood pressure. A characteristic, non-blanching skin rash may appear with meningococcal sepsis. One in 5 people surviving an episode of bacterial meningitis may have long lasting after-effects. These after-effects include hearing loss, seizures, limb weakness, difficulties with vision, speech, language, memory and communication, as well as scarring and limb amputations after sepsis. Vaccines offer the best protection against common types of bacterial meningitis.
Vaccines can prevent meningitis caused by: Maternal Group B streptococcus vaccines to prevent invasive GBS disease in infants are in the final stages of clinical development. Bacterial and viral meningitis can spread from person to person. If you live with someone who has either type of meningitis, you should:
Licensed vaccines against meningococcal, pneumococcal and Haemophilus influenzae disease have been available for many years. These bacteria have several different strains and vaccines are designed to protect against the most harmful strains. No universal vaccine exists.
Hib vaccine is used in most national childhood immunization programmes globally. WHO also recommends universal use pneumococcal conjugate vaccines . Meningococcal vaccines include multivalent polysaccharide conjugate vaccines , which include 4 to 5 meningococcal serogroups ; protein-based vaccines, which include meningococcal serogroup B, and combination vaccines combining the latter with 4-valent MMCV. Polysaccharide vaccines are still marketed internationally but are gradually being replaced by MMCV.
In the African meningitis belt, meningococcus serogroup A accounted for 80–85% of meningitis epidemics before the large-scale deployment of a meningococcal A conjugate vaccine starting in 2010. In 2023, the first pentavalent MMCV protecting against serogroups A, C, W, Y and X was prequalified by WHO and recommended for use in countries of the African meningitis belt. Roll-out of Men5CV has the potential to eliminate meningitis epidemics and make the meningitis belt history.
Post-exposure prophylaxis with antibiotics is given to close contacts of individuals with meningococcal disease to eradicate asymptomatic meningococcal carriage in the nose and decrease the risk of transmission. Identifying mothers whose babies are at risk of getting Group B streptococcal disease is recommended in many countries. Mothers at risk of transmitted GBS to their babies are offered intravenous penicillin during labour to prevent their babies developing GBS infection.
To diagnose meningitis, a lumbar puncture is needed to examine the cerebrospinal fluid . This should be done before starting antibiotics; however, if bacterial meningitis is suspected based on the signs and symptoms, a lumbar puncture should never delay antibiotic treatment. Laboratories will then perform specific tests with CSF or blood to identify the pathogen causing the infection. The tests will also help identify the treatments needed, and specifically for bacterial infections the susceptibility to types of antibiotics, as well as identify the strain(s) of the pathogen responsible and inform public health responses.
Meningitis is a medical emergency and requires urgent medical attention in an appropriate health-care facility.
Antibiotic treatment should be started as soon as possible when bacterial meningitis is suspected. The first dose of antibiotic treatment should not be delayed until the results of the lumbar puncture are available. The choice of antibiotic treatment should consider the age of the patient, presence of immunosuppression, and local prevalence of antimicrobial resistance patterns. In non-epidemic settings, intravenous corticosteroids are initiated with the first dose of antibiotics to reduce the inflammatory response and the risk of neurological sequelae and death,
Those who have lived through meningitis can have complications such as deafness, learning impairment or behavioural problem and require long-term treatment and care. The ongoing psychosocial impacts of disability from meningitis can have medical, educational, social and human rights-based implications. Access to both services and support for these conditions is often insufficient, especially in low- and middle-income countries. Individuals and families with members disabled by meningitis should be encouraged to seek services and guidance from local and national organizations of disabled people and other disability focused organizations, which can provide vital advice about legal rights, economic opportunities and social engagement to ensure people disabled by meningitis are able to live full and rewarding lives.
WHO has also developed an Intersectoral global action plan on epilepsy and other neurological disorders to address the many challenges and gaps in providing care and services for people with epilepsy and other neurological disorders that exist worldwide, including those suffering from meningitis sequelae. Surveillance, from case detection to investigation and laboratory confirmation, is essential to the control of meningitis. Main objectives include:
In 2020, the 73rd World Health Assembly approved resolution , in which all Member States committed to implementing the Defeating meningitis by 2030 global road map.
The roadmap sets a comprehensive vision “Towards a world free of meningitis” and has 3 visionary goals:
Related
News
Feature stories

========================================
menopause
========================================
For most women, menopause is marked by the end of monthly menstruation due to loss of ovarian follicular function. This means that the ovaries stop releasing eggs for fertilization. The regularity and length of the menstrual cycle varies across a woman’s reproductive life span, but the age at which natural menopause occurs is generally between 45 and 55 years for women worldwide. Natural menopause is deemed to have occurred after 12 consecutive months without menstruation for which there is no other obvious physiological or pathological cause and in the absence of clinical intervention.
Some women experience menopause earlier . This premature menopause may be because of certain chromosomal abnormalities, autoimmune disorders or other unknown causes. It is not possible to predict when an individual woman will experience menopause, although there are associations between the age at menopause and certain demographic, health and genetic factors. Menopause can also be induced as a consequence of surgical procedures that involve removal of both ovaries or medical interventions that cause cessation of ovarian function .
Many women have already stopped menstruating before menopause, for example those who have had certain surgical procedures as well as those using certain hormonal contraceptives and other medicines that cause infrequent or absent periods. They may still experience other changes related to the menopausal transition.
The hormonal changes associated with menopause can affect physical, emotional, mental and social well-being. The symptoms experienced during and following the menopausal transition vary substantially from person to person. Some have few if any symptoms. For others, symptoms can be severe and affect daily activities and quality of life. Some can experience symptoms for several years.
Symptoms associated with menopause include:
Body composition and cardiovascular risk can also be affected. Women’s advantage over men in terms of cardiovascular disease gradually disappears with the significant decline in oestrogen levels after menopause. Menopause can also result in the weakening of the pelvic support structures, increasing the risk of pelvic organ prolapse. Loss of bone density at menopause is a significant contributor to higher rates of osteoporosis and fractures.
There are a variety of non-hormonal and hormonal interventions that can help alleviate symptoms of menopause. Symptoms that impact on health and well-being should be discussed with a health-care provider to identify available management options, with consideration of medical history, values, and preferences. Pregnancy is still possible during perimenopause. Contraception is recommended to avoid unintended pregnancy until after 12 consecutive months without menstruation. Pregnancy after menopause is unlikely without fertility treatment that involves the use of donor eggs or previously frozen embryos.
During perimenopause and following menopause, it is still possible to acquire sexually transmitted infections , including HIV, through unprotected sexual contact, including oral, anal and vaginal sex. The thinning of the vaginal wall after menopause increases the chances of lesions and tears, thereby increasing the risk of HIV transmission during vaginal sex.
It is critical to see menopause as just one point in a continuum of life stages. A woman’s health status entering the perimenopausal period will largely be determined by prior health and reproductive history, lifestyle and environmental factors. Perimenopausal and postmenopausal symptoms can be disruptive to personal and professional lives, and changes associated with menopause will affect a woman’s health as she ages. Therefore, perimenopausal care plays an important role in the promotion of healthy ageing and quality of life.
Menopause can be an important transition from a social perspective, as well as a biological one. Socially, a women’s experience of menopause may be influenced by gender norms, familial and sociocultural factors, including how female ageing and the menopausal transition are viewed in her culture. The global population of postmenopausal women is growing. In 2021, women aged 50 and over accounted for 26% of all women and girls globally. This was up from 22% 10 years earlier (1). Additionally, women are living longer. Globally, a woman aged 60 years in 2019 could expect to live on average another 21 years (2). Menopause can offer an important opportunity to reassess one’s health, lifestyle, and goals.
Perimenopausal women need access to quality health services and communities and systems that can support them. Unfortunately, both awareness and access to menopause-related information and services remain a significant challenge in most countries. Menopause is often not discussed within families, communities, workplaces, or health-care settings. Women may not know that symptoms they experience are related to menopause, or that there are counselling and treatment options that can help alleviate discomfort. Those experiencing menopausal symptoms may feel embarrassed or ashamed to draw attention to their experiences and ask for support. Health-care providers may not be trained to recognize perimenopausal and post-menopausal symptoms and counsel patients on treatment options and staying healthy after the menopausal transition. Menopause currently receives limited attention in the training curricula for many health-care workers. The sexual well-being of menopausal women is overlooked in many countries. This means that common gynaecological effects of menopause, including vaginal dryness and pain during intercourse, may go unaddressed. Similarly, older women may not consider themselves at risk of sexually transmitted infections, including HIV (3), or may not be counselled by their providers to practice safer sex or get tested. Many governments do not have health polices and financing for the inclusion of menopause-related diagnosis, counselling, and treatment services as part of their routinely available services. Menopause-related services are a particular challenge in settings where there are often other urgent and competing priorities for health funding.
WHO considers that social, psychological and physical health support during the menopausal transition and after menopause should be an integral part of health care. WHO is committed to increasing understanding of menopause by:
Notes
1) Whilst most personal experiences with menopause relate to cisgender women , transgender men and some people who identify as neither men nor women also experience menopause. This fact sheet refers to “women” in alignment with the available data, which does not routinely identify gender identity. There is a paucity of readily available data on trans and gender diverse experiences of menopause. Trans and gender diverse people have unique age-related health needs that clinicians should consider, including referral to specialist services when necessary.
2) Although menopause is not a disease, this fact sheet refers to the perimenopausal and postmenopausal experiences of women as symptoms because they can result in a level of discomfort that affects their quality of life.
References
Related
Women's health Sexual and Reproductive Health and Research Ageing
Sexual health
Fact sheets

========================================
mercury-and-health
========================================
Mercury occurs naturally in the earth's crust. It is released into the environment from volcanic activity, weathering of rocks and as a result of human activity. Human activity is the main cause of mercury releases, particularly coal-fired power stations, residential coal burning for heating and cooking, industrial processes, waste incinerators and as a result of mining for mercury, gold and other metals.
Once in the environment, mercury can be transformed by bacteria into methylmercury. Methylmercury then bioaccumulates (bioaccumulation occurs when an organism contains higher concentrations of the substance than do the surroundings) in fish and shellfish. For example, large predatory fish are more likely to have high levels of mercury as a result of eating many smaller fish.
Mercury is toxic to human health, posing a particular threat to the development of the child in utero and early in life. All humans are exposed to some level of mercury. Human exposure occurs mainly through inhalation of elemental mercury vapours during industrial processes and through consumption of contaminated fish and shellfish. It has been estimated that among selected subsistence fishing populations, between 1.5/1000 and 17/1000 children showed cognitive impacts caused by the consumption of fish containing mercury (1).
Mercury is toxic to human health, posing a particular threat to the development of the child in utero and early in life. Mercury exists in various forms: elemental ; inorganic ; and organic , which all have different toxic effects, including on the nervous, digestive and immune systems, and on lungs, kidneys, skin and eyes.
The health impacts of mercury are numerous including kidney and nervous system damage and skin problems. Exposure of the fetus to methylmercury poses danger to the unborn child. The inorganic salts of mercury are corrosive to the skin, eyes and gastrointestinal tract, and may induce kidney toxicity if ingested.
Neurological and behavioural disorders may be observed after inhalation, ingestion or dermal exposure of different mercury compounds. Symptoms include tremors, insomnia, memory loss, neuromuscular effects, headaches and cognitive and motor dysfunction. Mild, subclinical signs of central nervous system toxicity can be seen in workers exposed to an elemental mercury level in the air of 20 μg/m3 or more for several years. Kidney effects have been reported, ranging from increased protein in the urine to kidney failure.
Interventions to prevent environmental releases and human exposure include:
Mercury is an element that cannot be destroyed; therefore, mercury already in use can be recycled for other essential uses, with no further need for mercury mining. Mercury use in artisanal and small-scale gold mining is particularly hazardous, and health effects on vulnerable populations are significant. Non-mercury gold-extraction techniques need to be promoted and implemented, and where mercury is still used safer work practices need to be employed to prevent exposure.
Burning coal for power and heat is a major source of mercury. Coal contains mercury and other hazardous air pollutants that are emitted when it is burned in coal-fired power plants, industrial boilers and household stoves.
Mercury has been traditionally used in medical devices, especially thermometers and blood-pressure measurement devices. These represent a hazard in terms of both breakage and long-term disposal. Human exposure occurs mainly through inhalation of elemental mercury vapours. The exposure is entirely preventable with safe and effective mercury-free alternatives. Mercury is contained in many products, including:
Dental amalgam, a common filling material for treating dental caries, has been used for over 175 years. One of the global targets of the WHO Global oral health action plan 2023–2030 is that, by 2030, 90% of countries have implemented measures to phase down the use of dental amalgam as stipulated in the Minamata Convention on Mercury or have phased it out. Skin lightening or skin bleaching is a dangerous practice often associated with the risk of exposure to mercury salts to inhibit melanin production. Mercury-containing skin lightening products are hazardous to health and have been banned in many countries. However, even in countries where tight controls exist, such products may be found being advertised and available to consumers via the Internet and other means.
Mercury, such as thiomersal , is used in very small amounts as a preservative in some vaccines and pharmaceuticals. Compared to methylmercury, ethylmercury is very different. Ethylmercury is broken down by the body quickly and does not accumulate. WHO has closely monitored scientific evidence relating to the use of thiomersal as a vaccine preservative for more than 20 years and has consistently reached the same conclusion: there is no evidence that the amount of thiomersal used in vaccines poses a health risk.
The continued release of mercury into the environment from human activity, the presence of mercury in the food chain, and the demonstrated adverse effects on humans led to the adoption of the Minamata Convention on Mercury in 2013. The Convention obliges Government Parties to take a range of actions, including addressing mercury emissions to air and the phasing out of certain mercury-containing products.
An amendment to the Minamata Convention in 2023 prohibits the manufacture, import or export of certain mercury-added products after 2025. The products list includes batteries, switches and relays, fluorescent lamps, non-electronic measuring devices, cosmetics, etc.
The World Health Assembly Resolution 67.11 on the Public health impacts of exposure to mercury and mercury compounds: the role of WHO and ministries of public health in the implementation of the Minamata Convention requests the Director-General to facilitate WHO’s efforts to provide advice and technical support to Member States to support the implementation of the Minamata Convention on Mercury in all health aspects related to mercury.
WHO publishes evidence about the health impacts of the different forms of mercury, guidance on identifying populations at risk from mercury exposure, and tools to reduce mercury exposure.
WHO is committed to raising awareness and understanding of the dangers of mercury exposure to vulnerable populations, such as pregnant women and infants, including online training for health care professionals. WHO leads projects to promote the sound management and disposal of health-care waste, eliminate use of mercury in skin-lightening products, phase down the use of dental amalgam and is facilitating the development of an affordable, validated, non-mercury-containing medical devices.
WHO is cooperating with the secretariat of the Minamata Convention to develop arrangements for the effectiveness evaluation of the Convention. This is expected to include consideration of human biomonitoring data. References
Related
News
Fact sheets

========================================
middle-east-respiratory-syndrome-coronavirus-(mers-cov)
========================================
The clinical spectrum of MERS-CoV infection ranges from no symptoms or mild respiratory symptoms to severe acute respiratory disease and death. A typical presentation of MERS is fever, cough and shortness of breath. Pneumonia is a common finding, but MERS patients may not always develop this condition. Gastrointestinal symptoms, including diarrhoea, have also been reported. Severe illness can cause respiratory failure that requires mechanical ventilation or support in an intensive care unit. Older people, people with weakened immune systems, and those with chronic diseases such as renal disease, cancer, chronic lung disease, hypertension, cardiovascular disease and diabetes appear to be at greater risk of developing severe disease.
Approximately 35% of cases reported to WHO have died, but this may be an overestimate of the true mortality rate, as mild cases of MERS may be missed by existing surveillance systems. Since the identification of MERS-CoV in 2012, 27 Member States have reported cases of MERS to WHO under the International Health Regulations : Algeria, Austria, Bahrain, China, Egypt, France, Germany, Greece, Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia, the Netherlands, Oman, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Thailand, Tunisia, Türkiye, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, United States of America, and Yemen.
Zoonotic transmission: MERS-CoV is a zoonotic virus, which means that is transmitted between animals and people. Studies have shown that humans are infected through direct or indirect contact with infected dromedary camels, although the exact route of transmission remains unclear. MERS-CoV has been identified in dromedary camels in several Member States in the Middle East, Africa and South Asia. Despite a limited number of human infections reported outside the Middle East, recent studies in human populations with occupational exposure to dromedary camels in a number of Member States indicate that there is also zoonotic transmission occurring in Member States in the African continent.
Human-to-human transmission: Human-to-human transmission is possible and has occurred predominantly among close contacts and in health care settings. This includes family and household members, health care workers and other patients. The largest outbreaks have occurred in health care facilities in Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, and the Republic of Korea. Outside the health care setting, there has been no sustained human-to-human transmission documented anywhere in the world.
Approximately 80% of human cases have been reported by Saudi Arabia, largely as a result of direct or indirect contact with infected dromedary camels or infected individuals in health care facilities. Cases identified outside the Middle East are usually individuals who appear to have been infected in the Middle East and then travelled to areas outside the region. To date, a limited number of outbreaks have occurred outside the Middle East.
No vaccine or specific treatment are currently available, however several MERS-CoV specific vaccines and treatments are in clinical development. In the absence of MERS-specific therapeutics, treatment of MERS patients is supportive and based on the patient’s clinical condition.
As a general precaution, anyone visiting farms, markets, barns, or other places where dromedary camels and other animals are present should practice general hygiene measures, including regular hand washing before and after touching animals, and should avoid contact with sick animals.
The consumption of raw or undercooked animal products, including milk and meat, carries a high risk of infection from a variety of pathogens that may cause disease in humans. Animal products that are processed appropriately through cooking or pasteurization are safe for consumption, but should also be handled with care to avoid cross contamination with uncooked foods. Camel meat and camel milk are nutritious products that can continue to be consumed after pasteurization, cooking, or other heat treatments.
Individuals at greater risk of developing severe disease should avoid contact with dromedary camels, drinking raw camel milk or camel urine, or eating meat that has not been properly cooked.
Transmission of MERS-CoV has occurred in health care facilities in several Member States, including from patients to health care workers and between patients in a health care setting before MERS-CoV was diagnosed. However, it is not always possible to identify patients with MERS‐CoV early or without testing because symptoms and other clinical features may be non‐specific.
There have been clusters of cases and larger outbreaks in health care facilities, especially when infection prevention and control practices are inadequate or inappropriate. Infection prevention and control measures are therefore critical to prevent the possible spread of MERS‐CoV in health care facilities. Facilities that provide care for patients suspected or confirmed MERS‐CoV infection should take appropriate measures to decrease the risk of transmission of the virus from an infected patient to other patients, health care workers, or visitors. Health care workers should be educated and trained in infection prevention and control and should refresh these skills regularly.
WHO does not recommend the application of any travel or trade restrictions or entry screening related to MERS-CoV.
WHO continues to work with public health and animal health specialists, clinicians and scientists in affected and at-risk Member States to gather and share scientific evidence to better understand the virus and the disease it causes, and to determine optimal and integrated surveillance strategies for MERS and other respiratory diseases, outbreak response priorities including comprehensive field investigations that follow a One Health approach, and clinical management and treatment approaches. WHO is also working with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the World Organization for Animal Health and national governments to develop public health prevention strategies to limit zoonotic transmission and amplification in humans, including the development of human and dromedary camel vaccine candidates.
Together with affected Member States and international technical partners and networks, WHO is coordinating the global health response to MERS, including: the provision of updated information on the epidemiological situation; conducting risk assessments and joint investigations with national authorities; convening scientific meetings; and developing technical guidance and training materials for health authorities and technical health agencies.
The Director‐General first convened an Emergency Committee under the International Health Regulations in 2013 to provide advice as to whether the outbreaks of MERS constitute a Public Health Emergency of International Concern and on the public health measures that should be taken. The Committee has met on ten occasions and, on each occasion, the Committee has concluded that the outbreaks do not meet the criteria of a PHEIC. WHO continues to strongly encourage all Member States maintain surveillance for severe acute respiratory infections , including MERS in Member States where MERS-CoV is known to be circulating in dromedary camels, and to carefully review any unusual patterns in SARI or pneumonia cases.
Both affected and at-risk Member States should maintain a high level of vigilance, especially those with large numbers of travellers or migrant workers returning from the Middle East. Surveillance should continue to be enhanced in affected Member States according to WHO guidance, along with infection prevention and control procedures in health care facilities. Under the provisions of the International Health Regulations , WHO continues to request that Member States report to WHO all confirmed and probable cases of infection with MERS-CoV, as well as information about exposure(s), testing, and clinical course to inform preparedness and response activities and guidance.
Related
For more information on MERS-CoV, including WHO technical guidance:
News

========================================
headache-disorders
========================================
Headache disorders, characterized by recurrent headaches, are among the most common disorders of the nervous system. A headache is a painful and disabling feature of primary headache disorders, namely migraine, tension-type headache and cluster headache. Headaches can also be caused by or occur secondarily to a long list of other conditions, the most common of which is medication-overuse headache. Headaches, particularly migraine, can also affect children and adolescents but can affect them in different ways. Children’s migraines often affect both sides of their head and are usually shorter in duration. But, similar to adults, migraines in childhood and adolescence can result in missing school, sports and other activities. Globally, headache disorders affect approximately 40% of the population, or 3.1 billion people in 2021, and are more common in females compared to males. They are among the top three most common neurological conditions for most age groups, starting with age 5 and remaining in the top three until the age of 80. Despite some regional variations, headache disorders are a worldwide problem, affecting people of all races, income levels and geographical areas (1). Not only is a headache painful, but it is also disabling. According to Global Health Estimates 2019, headache disorders were found to be third highest cause of disability-adjusted life years worldwide, after stroke and dementia. Headache disorders impose a burden on individuals that can include substantial personal suffering, impaired quality of life and financial cost. Repeated headache attacks, and often the constant fear of the next one, damage family life, social life and employment. The long-term effort of coping with a chronic headache disorder may also predispose the individual to other illnesses. For example, anxiety and depression are significantly more common in people who experience migraines than in healthy individuals. Migraines, tension-type headaches and medication-overuse headaches are of public health importance since they are responsible for high population levels of disability and ill health.
Migraine is a primary headache disorder, in most cases episodic, that usually lasts 4–72 hours, accompanied by nausea, vomiting and/or photophobia and phonophobia. It is sometimes preceded by a short lasting aura of unilateral, reversable visual, sensory or other symptoms. Migraine most often begins at puberty and generally affects those aged between 35 and 45 years. It is more common in women, possibly because of hormonal influences. Children typically experience migraine of shorter duration and abdominal symptoms are usually more prominent.
The exact cause of migraine is currently unknown but it is thought to result from the release of pain producing inflammatory substances around the nerves and blood vessels of the head. It can be triggered by alcohol and certain foods.
Migraine is characterized by recurring attacks and is often life-long. Attacks typically include:
Tension-type headaches are described as pressure or tightness, often like a band around the head, sometimes spreading into or from the neck. They may be stress-related or associated with musculoskeletal problems in the neck. They often begin during the teenage years and affect 50% more woman than men.
Episodic TTH, occurring on fewer than 15 days per month, is reported by more than 70% of some populations. Episodic TTH attacks usually last a few hours but can persist for several days. Chronic TTH can be unremitting and is more disabling than episodic TTH. Cluster headache (CH) is a primary headache disorder characterized by frequently recurring , brief but extremely severe headache, usually focused in or around one eye, with tearing and redness of the eye. The nose often runs or is blocked on the affected side and the eyelid may droop.
CH is relatively uncommon affecting fewer than 1 in 1000 adults, affecting six men to each woman. Most people developing CH are in their 20s or older. CH has episodic and chronic forms.
Medication-overuse headaches are caused by chronic and excessive use of medication to treat headache. MOH is the most common secondary headache disorder.
It may affect up to 5% of some populations, women more than men. MOH occurs by definition on more days than not, is oppressive, persistent and often at its worst on awakening. Migraines and other headaches can affect people's ability to work, through decreased productivity, and interpersonal relationships. Often people continue to try to work despite the debilitating symptoms that can occur. Headache-related productivity loss may affect people's careers and/or security, financial situation, relationships, and mental health. It also causes economic loss to companies and society.
Many of those troubled by headaches do not receive effective diagnosis and care. Appropriate treatment of headache disorders requires training of health professionals, accurate diagnosis and recognition of the conditions, appropriate treatment with cost-effective medications, simple lifestyle modifications and patient education. The main classes of drugs to treat headache disorders include analgesics, anti-emetics, specific anti-migraine medications and prophylactic medications. For migraine treatment, analgesics need to be taken at the first sign of symptoms to prevent the associated headache. Simple interventions to educate people on medication overuse headaches, migraine triggers and lifestyle modifications are highly effective. Restricting or eliminating alcohol, regular sleep and exercise schedules, healthy diets, staying hydrated and using a headache calendar to identify other triggers are often all that is needed to provide relief. Lack of knowledge among health care providers is the principal clinical barrier. Many people with headache disorders are not diagnosed and treated. In many countries medications, such as sumatriptan for migraines, are not available.
Poor awareness extends to the general public. Headache disorders are not perceived by the public as serious since they are mostly episodic, do not cause death and are not contagious. The low consultation rates in developed countries may indicate that many affected people are unaware that effective treatments exist. Half of people with headache disorders are estimated to be self-treating. Many governments, seeking to constrain health care costs, do not acknowledge the substantial burden of headache on society. They might not recognize that the direct costs of treating headache are small in comparison with the huge indirect cost savings that might be made if resources were allocated to treat headache disorders appropriately.
These evident burdens call for action. WHO recognizes this and partners with multiple non-governmental organizations to address headache. WHO published the Atlas of headache disorders in 2011, describing the burden due to headache disorders and resources available to reduce them.
In May 2022, the World Health Assembly endorsed the Intersectoral global action plan on epilepsy and other neurological disorders 2022–2031. The action plan addresses the challenges and gaps in providing care and services for people with epilepsy and other neurological disorders such as headache disorders that exist worldwide and ensure a comprehensive, coordinated response across sectors. This includes raising policy prioritization and strengthening governance, providing effective, timely and responsive diagnosis, treatment and care, implementing strategies for promotion and prevention, fostering research and innovation and strengthening information systems.
WHO’s position paper on optimizing brain health across the life course is a technical complement to the global action plan. The position paper provides a conceptual framework for brain health and how brain health can be optimized throughout life with actions across the following clusters of determinants: physical health, healthy environments, safety and security, learning and social connection, and access to quality services. References
1. Jaimie D Steinmetz, Katrin Seeher, Nicoline Schiess, Emma Nichols, Bochen Cao, Chiara Servili, Vanessa Cavallera, Christopher J L Murray, Kanyin Liane Ong, Valery L Feigin, Theo Vos, and Tarun Dua on behalf of the GBD network. Global, regional, and national burden of disorders affecting the nervous system, 1990–2021: a systematic analysis of the Global Burden of Disease Study 2021. Lancet Neurol. .
Related

========================================
millennium-development-goals-(mdgs)
========================================
The MDGs have been superseded by the Sustainable Development Goals
The United Nations Millennium Development Goals are 8 goals that UN Member States have agreed to try to achieve by the year 2015. The United Nations Millennium Declaration, signed in September 2000, commits world leaders to combat poverty, hunger, disease, illiteracy, environmental degradation, and discrimination against women. The MDGs are derived from this Declaration. Each MDG has targets set for 2015 and indicators to monitor progress from 1990 levels. Several of these relate directly to health.
While some countries have made impressive gains in achieving health-related targets, others are falling behind. Often the countries making the least progress are those affected by high levels of HIV/AIDS, economic hardship or conflict. Undernutrition which includes fetal growth restriction, stunting, wasting and deficiencies of vitamin A and zinc, along with suboptimal breastfeeding; is the underlying cause of death in an estimated 45% of all deaths among children under 5 years of age. The proportion of underweight children in developing countries has declined from 28% to 17% between 1990 and 2013. This rate of progress is close to the rate required to meet the MDG target, however improvements have been unevenly distributed between and within different regions.
Globally, significant progress has been made in reducing mortality in children under 5 years of age. In 2013, 6.3 million children under 5 died, compared with 12.7 million in 1990. Between 1990 and 2013, under-5 mortality declined by 49%, from an estimated rate of 90 deaths per 1000 live births to 46. The global rate of decline has also accelerated in recent years – from 1.2% per annum during 1990–1995 to 4.0% during 2005–2013. Despite this improvement, the world is unlikely to achieve the MDG target of a two-thirds reduction in 1990 mortality levels by the year 2015.
More countries are now achieving high levels of immunization coverage; in 2013, 66% of Member States reached at least 90% coverage. In 2013, global measles immunization coverage was 84% among children aged 12–23 months. During 2000–2013, estimated measles deaths decreased by 74% from 481 000 to 124 000. Despite a significant reduction in the number of maternal deaths – from an estimated 523 000 in 1990 to 289 000 in 2013 – the rate of decline is less than half of what is needed to achieve the MDG target of a three quarters reduction in the mortality ratio between 1990 and 2015.
To reduce the number of maternal deaths, women need access to good-quality reproductive health care and effective interventions. In 2012, 64% of women aged 15–49 years who were married or in a consensual union were using some form of contraception, while 12% wanted to stop or postpone childbearing but were not using contraception.
The proportion of women receiving antenatal care at least once during pregnancy was about 83% for the period 2007–2014, but for the recommended minimum of 4 or more visits the corresponding figure drops to around 64%.
The proportion of births attended by skilled personnel – crucial for reducing perinatal, neonatal and maternal deaths – is above 90% in 3 of the 6 WHO regions. However, increased coverage is needed in certain regions, such as the WHO African Region where the figure was still only 51%.
In 2013 an estimated 2.1 million people were newly infected with HIV – down from 3.4 million in 2001. By the end of 2013 about 12.9 million people were receiving antiretroviral therapy globally. Of these, 11.7 million lived in low- and middle-income countries, representing 36% of the estimated 32.6 million people living with HIV in these countries. Should current trends continue the target of placing 15 million people on ART by 2015 will be exceeded.
The decrease in the number of those newly infected along with the increased availability of ART have contributed to a major decline in HIV mortality levels – from 2.4 million people in 2005 to an estimated 1.5 million in 2013. As fewer people die from AIDS-related causes the number of people living with HIV is likely to continue to grow. About half the world’s population is at risk of malaria, and an estimated 198 million cases in 2013 led to approximately 584 000 deaths – most of these in children under the age of 5 living in Africa. During the period 2000–2013, malaria incidence and mortality rates of population at risk have both fallen globally, 30% and 47% respectively. The coverage of interventions such as the distribution of insecticide-treated nets and indoor residual spraying has greatly increased, and will need to be sustained in order to prevent the resurgence of disease and deaths caused by malaria. Globally, the MDG target of halting by 2015 and beginning to reverse the incidence of malaria has already been met.
The annual global number of new cases of tuberculosis has been slowly falling for a decade thus achieving MDG target 6.C to reverse the spread of the disease by 2015. In 2013, there were an estimated 9 million new cases and 1.5 million deaths . Globally, treatment success rates have been sustained at high levels since 2007, at or above the target of 85%. However, multi-drug resistant tuberculosis , which emerged primarily as a result of inadequate treatment, continues to pose problems.
MDG Target 6.C also includes neglected tropical diseases – a medically diverse group of infectious conditions caused by a variety of pathogens. In 2013 only 6314 cases of human African trypanosomiasis were reported, representing the lowest levels of recorded cases in 50 years. This disease is now targeted for elimination as a public health problem by 2020. Dracunculiasis is also on the verge of eradication with an historic low of 126 cases reported in 2014 and an ongoing WHO target of interrupting its transmission by the end of 2015. Plans to eliminate leprosy as a public health problem worldwide by 2020 have also been prepared and are being implemented. The elimination of visceral leishmaniasis as a public health problem in the Indian subcontinent by 2020 is on track with a greater than 75% reduction in incident cases recorded since the launch of the programme in 2005. In the case of lymphatic filariasis, more than 5 billion treatments have been delivered since 2000 to stop its spread and of the 73 known endemic countries 39 are on track to achieve its elimination as a public health problem by 2020.
The world has now met the MDG target relating to access to safe drinking-water. In 2012, 90% of the population used an improved source of drinking-water compared with 76% in 1990. Progress has however been uneven across different regions, between urban and rural areas, and between rich and poor.
With regard to basic sanitation, current rates of progress are too slow for the MDG target to be met globally. In 2012, 2.5 billion people did not have access to improved sanitation facilities, with 1 billion these people still practicing open defecation. The number of people living in urban areas without access to improved sanitation is increasing because of rapid growth in the size of urban populations.
Many people continue to face a scarcity of medicines in the public sector, forcing them to the private sector where prices can be substantially higher. Surveys undertaken from 2007-2013 show the average availability of selected generic medicines in 21 low- and middle-income countries was only 55% in the public sector. Even the lowest-priced generics can put common treatments beyond the reach of low-income households in developing countries. The greatest price is paid by patients suffering chronic diseases. Effective treatments for the majority of the global chronic disease burden exist, yet universal access remains out-of-reach.
WHO works with partners to support national efforts to achieve the health-related MDGs. WHO’s activities include:
WHO assists national authorities as they develop health policies and plans, and helps governments work with development partners to align external assistance with domestic priorities. WHO also collects and disseminates data on health so countries can plan health spending and track progress.
Related
More
Related health topicsUniversal Health Coverage Sustainable Development Goals Related health topics
Universal Health Coverage Sustainable Development Goals

========================================
mpox
========================================
Mpox is an infectious disease that can cause a painful rash, enlarged lymph nodes, fever, headache, muscle ache, back pain and low energy. Most people fully recover, but some get very sick. Mpox is caused by the monkeypox virus . It is an enveloped double-stranded DNA virus of the Orthopoxvirus genus in the Poxviridae family, which includes variola, cowpox, vaccinia and other viruses. There are two distinct clades of the virus: clade I and clade II .
A global outbreak of clade IIb began in 2022 and continues to this day, including in some African countries. There are also growing outbreaks of clades Ia and Ib affecting the Democratic Republic of the Congo and other countries in Africa. As of August 2024, clade Ib has also been detected beyond Africa.
The natural reservoir of the virus is unknown, but various small mammals such as squirrels and monkeys are susceptible. Mpox spreads from person to person mainly through close contact with someone who has mpox, including members of a household. Close contact includes skin-to-skin and mouth-to-mouth or mouth-to-skin contact , and it can also include being face-to-face with someone who has mpox (such as talking or breathing close to one another, which can generate infectious respiratory particles).
People with multiple sexual partners are at higher risk of acquiring mpox. People can also contract mpox from contaminated objects such as clothing or linen, through needle injuries in health care, or in community settings such as tattoo parlours. During pregnancy or birth, the virus may be passed to the baby. Contracting mpox during pregnancy can be dangerous for the fetus or newborn infant and can lead to loss of the pregnancy, stillbirth, death of the newborn, or complications for the parent. Animal-to-human transmission of mpox occurs from infected animals to humans from bites or scratches, or during activities such as hunting, skinning, trapping, cooking, playing with carcasses or eating animals. The animal reservoir of the monkeypox virus remains unknown and further studies are underway. More research is needed on how mpox spreads during outbreaks in different settings and under different conditions.
Mpox causes signs and symptoms which usually begin within a week but can start 1–21 days after exposure. Symptoms typically last 2–4 weeks but may last longer in someone with a weakened immune system. Common symptoms of mpox are: For some people, the first symptom of mpox is a rash, while others may have fever, muscle aches or sore throat first. The mpox rash often begins on the face and spreads over the body, extending to the palms of the hands and soles of the feet. It can also start on other parts of the body where contact was made, such as the genitals. It starts as a flat sore, which develops into a blister filled with liquid that may be itchy or painful. As the rash heals, the lesions dry up, crust over and fall off. Some people may have one or a few skin lesions and others have hundreds or more. These can appear anywhere on the body including: Some people also have painful swelling of their rectum or pain and difficulty when peeing or when swallowing. People with mpox can pass the disease on to others until all sores have healed and a new layer of skin has formed. Some people can be infected without developing any symptoms. Although getting mpox from someone who is asymptomatic has been reported, information is still limited on how common it is. Children, pregnant people and people with weak immune systems, including people living with HIV that is not well controlled, are at higher risk for serious illness and death due to complications from mpox. Some people with mpox become very sick. For example, the skin can become infected with bacteria, leading to abscesses or serious skin damage. Other complications include pneumonia; corneal infection with loss of vision; pain or difficulty swallowing; vomiting and diarrhoea causing dehydration or malnutrition; and infections of the blood , brain , heart , rectum , genital organs or urinary passages . Mpox can be fatal in some cases. Identifying mpox can be difficult because other infections and conditions can look similar. It is important to distinguish mpox from chickenpox, measles, bacterial skin infections, scabies, herpes, syphilis, other sexually transmitted infections, and medication-associated allergies. Someone with mpox may also have another sexually transmitted infection at the same time, such as syphilis or herpes. Alternatively, a child with suspected mpox may also have chickenpox. For these reasons, testing is key for people to get care as early as possible and prevent severe illness and further spread.
The preferred laboratory test for mpox is detection of viral DNA by polymerase chain reaction . The best diagnostic specimens are taken directly from the rash – skin, fluid or crusts – collected by vigorous swabbing. In the absence of skin lesions, testing can be done using swabs of the throat or anus. Testing blood is not recommended. Antibody detection methods may not be useful as they do not distinguish between different orthopoxviruses. HIV testing should be offered to adults with mpox, and children as appropriate. Diagnostic tests for other conditions should be considered where feasible, for example, varicella zoster virus , syphilis and herpes.
The goal of treating mpox is to take care of the rash, manage pain and prevent complications. Early and supportive care is important to help manage symptoms and avoid further problems. Getting an mpox vaccine can help prevent infection . It is recommended for people at high-risk of getting mpox, especially during an outbreak. Groups that may be at high risk of mpox include: The vaccine can also be administered after a person has been in contact with someone who has mpox . In these cases, the vaccine should be given less than 4 days after contact with someone who has mpox. The vaccine can be given for up to 14 days if the person has not developed symptoms.
Some antivirals have received emergency use authorization in some countries and are being evaluated in clinical trials. To date, there is no proven effective antiviral treatment for mpox. It is a priority to continue evaluation of therapeutics in robust clinical trials and to focus on optimizing supportive care for patients.
Individuals with HIV and mpox should continue taking their antiretroviral therapy . ART should be initiated within 7 days of diagnosis of HIV.
Most people with mpox will recover within 2–4 weeks. Things to do to help the symptoms and prevent transmitting mpox to others: Do Do not To prevent spread of mpox to others, people with mpox should isolate at home following guidance from their health care provider, or in hospital if needed, for the duration of the infectious period . Covering lesions and wearing a well-fitting mask when in the presence of others may help prevent spread. Using condoms during sex will help reduce the risk of getting mpox but will not prevent spread from skin-to-skin or mouth-to-skin contact. If having sex, use condoms as a precaution for 12 weeks after you have recovered.
Taking a break from sexual activity with new partners during periods of increased transmission can reduce the risk of getting mpox. Those who have had contact with someone with mpox should monitor for signs and symptoms for 21 days and take precautions such as avoiding sexual activity during this period.
Health workers should follow infection prevention and control measures to protect themselves while caring for patients with mpox by wearing appropriate personal protective equipment and adhering to protocol for safely swabbing lesions for diagnostic testing and handling sharp objects such as needles.
The monkeypox virus was discovered in Denmark in monkeys kept for research. The first reported human case of mpox was a nine-month-old boy in the Democratic Republic of the Congo . Following the eradication of smallpox in 1980 and the end of smallpox vaccination worldwide, mpox steadily emerged in central, east and west Africa. Since then, mpox has been reported sporadically in central and east Africa and west Africa . In 2003, an outbreak in the United States of America was linked to imported wild animals . Since 2005, thousands of cases are reported in the Democratic Republic of the Congo every year. In 2017, mpox re-emerged in Nigeria and continues to spread between people across the country and in travellers to other destinations. Data on suspected and confirmed cases reported up to 2021 are available here and data on laboratory confirmed cases from 2022 until today are available here.
In May 2022, an outbreak of mpox appeared suddenly and rapidly spread across Europe, the Americas and then all six WHO regions. The global outbreak has affected primarily gay, bisexual, and other men who have sex with men and has spread person-to-person through sexual networks. More information on the global outbreak is available here, including information on community responses to control the outbreak.
In 2022, outbreaks of mpox due to clade I occurred in refugee camps in the Republic of the Sudan. Since 2022, there has also been an upsurge in mpox cases and deaths in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In some areas of the country, a new offshoot of clade I, called clade Ib, has been spreading person-to-person. As of mid-2024, the clade has also been reported in other countries. Over 120 countries have reported mpox between Jan 2022 – Aug 2024, with over 100 000 laboratory-confirmed cases reported and over 220 deaths among confirmed cases.
Stigma and discrimination for any disease are never acceptable. Stigma linked to mpox can undermine public health efforts or prolong a disease outbreak, as people may be more reluctant to come forward and seek care and treatment. For mpox, stigma, discrimination and racism have been particularly directed against communities initially most affected by the disease, namely men who have sex with men, trans people and gender diverse communities.
WHO works with Member States and partners to prevent and respond to outbreaks of mpox. This includes coordinating research on vaccines and treatments, strengthening country health systems, and working to facilitate equitable access to vaccines, therapeutics, diagnostics and other tools.
WHO Director-General Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus has declared mpox a public health emergency of international concern twice, the first time in May 2022 and the second time in August 2024.
Related
WHO's work on mpox
Questions and answers on mpox
Science in 5: Mpox, what you need to know
Mpox outbreak 2022
R&D Blueprint and mpox
Public advice
Mpox Outbreak Toolbox News
More
Recovering from mpox at home How to use a bifurcated needle to perform multiple puncture vaccination technique
Recovering from mpox at home How to use a bifurcated needle to perform multiple puncture vaccination technique

========================================
multi-drug-resistant-gonorrhoea
========================================
Gonorrhoea is a sexually transmitted infection that remains a major public health concern. WHO estimates that in 2020, there were 82.4 million [47.7 million-130.4 million] new cases infected among adolescents and adults aged 15–49 years worldwide, with a global incident rate of 19 per 1000 women and 23 per 1000 men. Most cases were in the WHO African Region and the Western Pacific Region.
Antimicrobial resistance in Neisseria gonorrhoeae appeared soon after the antimicrobial medicines started to be used. This has continued to expand over the past 80 years, affecting medicines such as tetracyclines, macrolides , sulphonamides and trimethoprim combinations and, more recently, quinolones. In many countries, ciprofloxacin resistance is exceedingly high, azithromycin resistance is increasing and resistance or decreased susceptibility to cefixime and ceftriaxone continue to emerge.
The extensively drug-resistant gonorrhoea with high-level resistance to the current recommended treatment for gonorrhoea but also including resistance to penicillin, sulphonamides, tetracycline, fluoroquinolones and macrolides are called gonorrhoea superbugs or super gonorrhoea.
The first reported treatment failure with cefixime was in Japan. In the past decade, confirmed failure to cure gonorrhoea with ceftriaxone alone or combined with azithromycin or doxycyline was reported in Australia, France, Japan, Slovenia, Sweden and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. In 2016, the first global failure to cure pharyngeal gonorrhoea with dual therapy was confirmed in the United Kingdom. An international spreading ceftriaxone-resistant gonococcal strain has been reported in Denmark, France, Japan and the United Kingdom. In 2018, the first global gonococcal strain with ceftriaxone resistance and high azithromycin resistance causing pharyngeal gonorrhoea was reported in the United Kingdom. There are increasing numbers of treatment failure cases being reported from Austria, the United Kingdom, and other countries.
All confirmed treatment failures except one recent case in the United Kingdom have been pharyngeal infections affecting the throat. The majority of infections in the pharynx are asymptomatic. Antimicrobial drugs don’t penetrate the tissue well in that area, and the pharynx is also home to naturally occurring related bacteria of the Neisseria species that can contribute to drug resistance. Most data on this issue come from higher income countries; however, the majority of cases of gonorrhoea are in less resourced countries and areas. Resistance to so many treatment options, including penicillins, sulphonamides, tetracyclines, quinolones and macrolides , as well as so-called last line options like cephalosporins, make N. gonorrhoeae a multidrug resistant organism.
This resistance is caused by a number of factors, including unrestricted access to antimicrobials, inappropriate selection and overuse of antibiotics, and poor quality antibiotics. Further, genetic mutations within the organism have contributed to increased drug resistance in N. gonorrhoeae. Infections outside of the genital area – namely in the throat and rectum – particularly affect key populations such men who have sex with men. This may also play an important role in the development of resistant strains as N. gonorrhoeae interact and exchange genetic material with other organisms in these parts of the body. Gonococcal infections have critical implications to reproductive, maternal and newborn health including:
The financial costs of these complications are very high for both individuals and health care systems. Antimicrobial resistance increases this burden by prolonging the infection in more people and increasing the number of people with long-term complications of gonococcal infections.
The emergence of different forms of resistance in N. gonorrhoeae is often followed by a rapid spread of the disease. This is not a problem only of the low- and middle-income countries, and recent treatment failures have also been seen in higher-income countries. Since it can be difficult to find complete information from areas with limited resources for surveillance, the antimicrobial resistance is expected to be much higher than what is currently seen due to silent spreading.
Fighting multidrug-resistant N. gonorrhoeae requires 2 approaches: broad control of drug resistance and control of gonorrhoea. Both should be approached in the wider contexts of global control of antimicrobial resistance.
WHO is implementing the Global Action Plan to Control the Spread and Impact of Antimicrobial Resistance in N. gonorrhoeae to facilitate effective actions against the spread of multi-drug resistant N. gonorrhoeae. This Plan is part of the greater STI surveillance plan to help early detection of emerging resistant strains, combined with a public health response to prevent and treat gonococcal infections and reduce the impact of gonorrhoea on sexual and reproductive health.
The Global Health Sector Strategy on HIV, Hepatitis and STIs has set targets to reduce the number of new cases of gonorrhoea among people 15–49 years old from 82.3 million per year in 2020 to 8.23 million per year in 2030, thus reducing the year incidence by 90% by 2030. Recognizing that this reduction may be difficult to achieve with available interventions, and given increasing antimicrobial resistance, the strategy has emphasized the need to develop effective gonococcal vaccines. No currently licensed gonococcal vaccines exist. However, interest in gonococcal vaccine development has been reinvigorated not only by the marked increases in gonococcal antimicrobial resistance, but also by mounting scientific evidence suggesting gonococcal vaccines are biologically feasible.
The key WHO actions are:
WHO will continue to work with Member States and partners to understand and reduce antimicrobial resistance through better control of antibiotic medications and actions to prevent the spread of gonorrhoea.
Related
Antimicrobial resistance Sexually transmitted infections
Key data on STIs
Enhanced Gonococcal Antimicrobial Surveillance Programme : general protocol Fact sheets

========================================
multiple-sclerosis
========================================
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a condition that happens when the immune system attacks the brain and spinal cord. Symptoms of MS vary from person to person and depend on the location and severity of nerve fibre damage. These often include vision problems, tiredness, trouble walking and keeping balance, and numbness or weakness in the arms and legs. Symptoms can come and go or last for a long time.
The causes of MS are not known but a family history of the disease may increase the risk.
While there is no cure for MS, treatment can reduce symptoms, prevent further relapses and improve quality of life.
MS can present in a variety of ways including: MS is not always easy to diagnose in its early stages. Typically, people who have been diagnosed with MS will have been through several diagnostic stages, which can be an unsettling and frightening experience.
Symptoms of multiple sclerosis can be different from person to person. They can come and go or get worse over time. MS can affect any part of the central nervous system.
MS symptoms can worsen with heat or during other infections such as urinary tract or respiratory infections. Symptoms can include:
MS is an inflammatory demyelinating condition that results from an autoimmune attack on myelin, the fatty insulation that surrounds the nerves in the brain and spinal cord. This disrupts the electrical impulses that are sent through the nerves to the rest of the body and results in scars . It is not known what triggers the immune system to attack myelin, but genetic and environmental factors are thought to play a role. MS happens most commonly in young to middle-aged adults, more in females than males, and is more common in higher latitudes, possibly due to sun exposure and vitamin D. MS is a diagnosis of exclusion and there are no definitive diagnostic tests. Magnetic resonance imaging can help with diagnosis by showing plaques or sclerosis on the brain and spinal cord. Other tests such as lumbar puncture, optical coherence tomography and visual evoked potentials can also help support the diagnosis. Treatments for MS will be different for each person. They depend on the stage of the disease and symptoms.
The goals of MS treatment are to reduce the frequency and severity of relapses, slow disease progression, manage symptoms, and improve quality of life. Specific MS disease modifying therapies are started as early as possible to slow disease progression and prevent relapses.
Steroids are sometimes used in the short term to treat relapses. Other medicines can be used to reduce the symptoms of MS such as fatigue, muscle tightening, depression and urinary or sexual problems. These medicines do not change the course of the disease but help manage the symptoms. Rehabilitation specialists can help improve functioning, quality of life and reduce muscle stiffness and spasms. Many people feel fatigue with multiple sclerosis. Ways to manage fatigue include:
In the past twenty years treatment options for MS have improved dramatically. In high income countries many oral, intravenous and injectable options exist to treat MS. However, most of these medications are not available in low- and middle-income countries and there is still a lack of treatment options for progressive types of MS.
People with MS and their families should be encouraged to seek services and guidance from local and national Organizations of Disabled People and other disability focused organizations, which can provide vital advice about legal rights, economic opportunities and social engagement to ensure that people disabled by MS or other neurological disorders are able to live full and rewarding lives.
In May 2022, the World Health Assembly endorsed the Intersectoral global action plan on epilepsy and other neurological disorders 2022–2031. The action plan addresses the challenges and gaps in providing care and services for people with epilepsy and other neurological disorders such as MS that exist worldwide and ensure a comprehensive, coordinated response across sectors. This includes raising policy prioritization and strengthening governance, providing effective, timely and responsive diagnosis, treatment and care, implementing strategies for promotion and prevention, fostering research and innovation and strengthening information systems.
WHO also supports countries to manage MS by: Related
News
Fact sheets

========================================
mycetoma
========================================
Mycetoma is a chronic disease usually of the foot but any part of the body can be affected. Infection is most probably acquired by traumatic inoculation of fungi or ‎bacteria into the subcutaneous tissue. So far more than 70 different bacteria and fungi have been indicated as causative agents.
The disease commonly affects young adults, mostly males aged between 15 and 30 years in developing countries. People of low socioeconomic status and manual workers such as agriculturalists, labourers and herdsmen are the most commonly affected.
Mycetoma has numerous adverse medical, health and socioeconomic impacts on patients, communities and health authorities. Accurate data on its incidence and prevalence are not available. However, early detection and treatment are important to reduce morbidity and improve treatment outcomes.
Mycetoma was first reported in the mid-19th century in Madurai, India, and hence was initially called Madura foot.
Currently, accurate data on its incidence and prevalence are not available. However, early detection and treatment are important to reduce morbidity and improve treatment outcomes.
The causative organisms of mycetoma are distributed worldwide but are endemic in tropical and subtropical areas in the so called 'Mycetoma belt', which includes among others, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Chad, Ethiopia, India, Mauritania, Mexico, Senegal, Somalia, Sudan, Thailand, and Yemen. The number of cases reported differs per country, however at the moment most cases have been reported from Mexico and Sudan.
Transmission, most probably occurs when the causative organism enters the body through minor trauma or a penetrating injury, commonly thorn pricks. There is a clear association between mycetoma and individuals who walk barefooted and are manual workers.
Mycetoma is characterized by a combination of painless ‎subcutaneous mass, multiple sinuses and discharge ‎containing grains. Within the grain, the causative agent is found. It usually ‎spreads to involve the skin, deep structures and bone, resulting in ‎destruction, ‎deformity and loss of function, which may be fatal. ‎Mycetoma commonly ‎involves the extremities, back and gluteal region but any other part of the body can be affected.‎ Given its slow progression, painless nature, lack of awareness, and scarcity of medical and health facilities in endemic areas, many patients present late with an advanced infection where amputation may be the only available treatment. Secondary bacterial infection is common, and that may cause increased pain, disability and fatal septicaemia , if untreated. Infection is not transmitted from human to human.
The diagnosis of mycetoma is based on clinical presentation and identification of the causative organisms which can be detected by directly examining the grains that are discharged by the sinuses. The samples can be obtained by Fine Needle Aspiration or surgical biopsy. Although grains microscopy is helpful in detecting the causative organism, it is important to further identify these by culture but even then misclassification occurs. Identification by Polymerase chain reaction is the most reliable method but has high cost and lacks standardized techniques. There is no point-of-care rapid diagnostic test that can be used in the field. Imaging techniques including X-rays, ultrasound, magnetic resonance and computer tomography can be used to assess the extent of lesions and planning the clinical management.
The treatment depends on the causative organism. For bacterial mycetoma, treatment consists of a combination of antibiotics whereas for fungal mycetoma treatment consists of a combination of antifungal drugs and surgery. The treatment is lengthy, has many side effects, expensive not available in endemic areas and most importantly often unsatisfactory. For fungal mycetoma, amputations and recurrent infections are common.
Mycetoma is not a notifiable disease and a global surveillance system is still being developed. There are no control programmes for mycetoma yet, except for Sudan. Preventing infection is difficult, but people living in or travelling to endemic areas should be advised not to walk barefooted.
To build national capacities on mycetoma, the Government of Sudan and WHO convened the First International Training Workshop on Mycetoma in Khartoum on 10–14 February 2019. Drawing on the expertise of the Mycetoma Research Centre in Khartoum, the workshop - attended by approximately 70 health staff from many mycetoma-endemic countries. It provided a unique opportunity to share experiences and standardize practices relating to diagnosis, treatment and surveillance. The workshop was followed by the Sixth International Conference on Mycetoma in Khartoum on 15-17 February 2019. The Conference adopted the ‘Khartoum Call for Action on mycetoma’ which calls on a wide range of actors to take specific public-health and policy measures to address the burden of mycetoma.
Elaborating a public health strategy for the prevention and control of Mycetoma requires collection of epidemiological data on burden of disease, investment in research and product development, so that cost-effective prevention, diagnosis, early treatment and case management can be practiced in low-resource settings. At present, active case-finding with early diagnosis and treatment with currently available tools is the most appropriate approach for lessening Mycetoma's disease morbidity and disability. However, important public health actions are required to tackling the burden of mycetoma. Some of these include:
Currently, the Drugs for Neglected Diseases initiative and other partners are investigating the safety and efficacy of fosravuconazole in treating fungal mycetoma in Sudan. In addition to an expected higher cure rate, if successful, the adoption of the results of this treatment would allow for a shorter therapeutic protocol, boosting compliance with treatment and saving financial resources.
Related
News
Fact sheets

========================================
mycotoxins
========================================
Mycotoxins are toxic compounds that are naturally produced by certain types of moulds . Moulds that can produce mycotoxins grow on numerous foodstuffs such as cereals, dried fruits, nuts and spices. Mould growth can occur either before harvest or after harvest, during storage, on/in the food itself often under warm, damp and humid conditions. Most mycotoxins are chemically stable and survive food processing. Several hundred different mycotoxins have been identified, but the most commonly observed mycotoxins that present a concern to human health and livestock include aflatoxins, ochratoxin A, patulin, fumonisins, zearalenone and nivalenol/deoxynivalenol. Mycotoxins appear in the food chain as a result of mould infection of crops both before and after harvest. Exposure to mycotoxins can happen either directly by eating infected food or indirectly from animals that are fed contaminated feed, in particular from milk.
The effects of some food-borne mycotoxins are acute with symptoms of severe illness appearing quickly after consumption of food products contaminated with mycotoxins. Other mycotoxins occurring in food have been linked to long-term effects on health, including the induction of cancers and immune deficiency. Of the several hundred mycotoxins identified so far, about a dozen have gained the most attention due to their severe effects on human health and their occurrences in food. Aflatoxins are amongst the most poisonous mycotoxins and are produced by certain moulds which grow in soil, decaying vegetation, hay, and grains. Crops that are frequently affected by Aspergillus spp. include cereals , oilseeds , spices and tree nuts . The toxins can also be found in the milk of animals that are fed contaminated feed, in the form of aflatoxin M1. Large doses of aflatoxins can lead to acute poisoning and can be life threatening, usually through damage to the liver. Aflatoxins have also been shown to be genotoxic, meaning they can damage DNA and cause cancer in animal species. There is also evidence that they can cause liver cancer in humans.
Ochratoxin A is produced by several species of Aspergillus and Penicillium and is a common food-contaminating mycotoxin. Contamination of food commodities, such as cereals and cereal products, coffee beans, dry vine fruits, wine and grape juice, spices and liquorice, occurs worldwide. Ochratoxin A is formed during the storage of crops and is known to cause a number of toxic effects in animal species. The most sensitive and notable effect is kidney damage, but the toxin may also have effects on fetal development and on the immune system. Contrary to the clear evidence of kidney toxicity and kidney cancer due to ochratoxin A exposure in animals, this association in humans is unclear, however effects on kidney have been demonstrated. Patulin is a mycotoxin produced by a variety of moulds, particularly Aspergillus, Penicillium and Byssochlamys. Often found in rotting apples and apple products, patulin can also occur in various mouldy fruits, grains and other foods. Major human dietary sources of patulin are apples and apple juice made from affected fruit. The acute symptoms in animals include liver, spleen and kidney damage and toxicity to the immune system. For humans, nausea, gastrointestinal disturbances and vomiting have been reported. Patulin is considered to be genotoxic however a carcinogenic potential has not been demonstrated yet. Fusarium fungi are common to the soil and produce a range of different toxins, including trichothecenes such as deoxynivalenol , nivalenol and T-2 and HT-2 toxins, as well as zearalenone and fumonisins. The formation of the moulds and toxins occur on a variety of different cereal crops. Different fusarium toxins are associated with certain types of cereal. For example, both DON and ZEN are often associated with wheat, T-2 and HT-2 toxins with oats, and fumonisins with maize . Trichothecenes can be acutely toxic to humans, causing rapid irritation to the skin or intestinal mucosa and lead to diarrhoea. Reported chronic effects in animals include suppression of the immune system. ZEN has been shown to have hormonal, estrogenic effects and can cause infertility at high intake levels, particularly in pigs. Fumonisins have been related to oesophageal cancer in humans, and to liver and kidney toxicity in animals.
It is important to note that mould that produces mycotoxins can grow on a variety of different crops and foodstuff and can penetrate deep into food and do not just grow on the surface. Mould usually does not grow in properly dried and stored foods, so efficient drying of commodities and maintenance of the dry state, or proper storage, is an effective measure against mould growth and the production of mycotoxins. To minimize the health risk from mycotoxins, people are advised to: WHO, in collaboration with FAO, is responsible for assessing the risks to humans of mycotoxins – through contamination in food – and for recommending adequate protection. Risk assessments of mycotoxins in food done by the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives are used by governments and by the Codex Alimentarius Commission to establish maximum levels in food or provide other risk management advice to control or prevent contamination. Codex standards are the international reference for national food supplies and for trade in food, so that people everywhere can be confident that the food they buy meets the agreed standards for safety and quality, no matter where it was produced.
JECFA or ad hoc FAO/WHO scientific expert groups consist of independent, international experts who conduct scientific reviews of all available studies and other relevant data on specific mycotoxins. The outcome of such health risk assessments can either be a maximum tolerable intake level, or other guidance to indicate the level of health concern , including advice on risk management measures to prevent and control contamination, and on the analytical methods and monitoring and control activities.
These tolerable daily intakes are used by governments and international risk managers, such as the Codex Alimentarius Commission, to establish maximum levels for mycotoxins in food. The maximum levels for mycotoxins in food are very low due to their severe toxicity. For example, the maximum levels for aflatoxins set by the Codex in various nuts, grains, dried figs and milk are in the range of 0.5 to 15 µg/kg . The Codex maximum limit for patulin in apple juice is 50 µg/L.
Exposure to mycotoxins needs to be kept as low as possible to protect the people. Mycotoxins not only pose a risk to both human and animal health, but also impact food security and nutrition by reducing people’s access to healthy food. WHO encourages national authorities to monitor and ensure that levels of mycotoxins in foodstuff on their market are as low as possible and comply with the both national and international maximum levels, conditions and legislation. Related
Fact sheets

========================================
natural-toxins-in-food
========================================
Natural toxins are toxic compounds that are naturally produced by living organisms. These toxins are not harmful to the organisms themselves but they may be toxic to other creatures, including humans, when eaten. These chemical compounds have diverse structures and differ in biological function and toxicity.
Some toxins are produced by plants as a natural defense mechanism against predators, insects or microorganisms, or as consequence of infestation with microorganisms, such as mould, in response to climate stress .
Other sources of natural toxins are microscopic algae and plankton in oceans or sometimes in lakes that produce chemical compounds that are toxic to humans but not to fish or shellfish that eat these toxin-producing organisms. When people eat fish or shellfish that contain these toxins, illness can rapidly follow. Some of the most commonly found natural toxins that can pose a risk to our health are described below. Toxins formed by algae in the ocean and fresh water are called algal toxins. Algal toxins are generated during blooms of particular naturally occurring algal species. Shellfish such as mussels, scallops and oysters are more likely to contain these toxins than fish. Algal toxins can cause diarrhea, vomiting, tingling, paralysis and other effects in humans, other mammals or fish. The algal toxins can be retained in shellfish and fish or contaminate drinking water. They have no taste or smell, and are not eliminated by cooking or freezing. Another example is ciguatera fish poisoning which is caused by consuming fish contaminated with dinoflagellates that produce ciguatoxins. Some fish known to harbour ciguatoxins include barracuda, black grouper, dog snapper, and king mackerel. Symptoms of ciguatera poisoning include nausea, vomiting, and neurologic symptoms, such as tingling sensation on fingers and toes. There is currently no specific treatment for ciguatera poisoning.
Cyanogenic glycosides are phytotoxins which occur in at least 2000 plant species, of which a number of species are used as food in some areas of the world. Cassava, sorghum, stone fruits, bamboo roots and almonds are especially important foods containing cyanogenic glycosides. The potential toxicity of a cyanogenic plant depends primarily on the potential that its consumption will produce a concentration of cyanide that is toxic to exposed humans. In humans, the clinical signs of acute cyanide intoxication can include: rapid respiration, drop in blood pressure, dizziness, headache, stomach pains, vomiting, diarrhoea, mental confusion, cyanosis with twitching and convulsions followed by terminal coma. Death due to cyanide poisoning can occur when the cyanide level exceeds the limit an individual is able to detoxify. These toxins are present in many plants such as parsnips , celery roots, citrus plants and some medicinal plants. Furocoumarins are stress toxins and are released in response to stress, such as physical damage to the plant. Some of these toxins can cause gastrointestinal problems in susceptible people. Furocoumarins are phototoxic, they can cause severe skin reactions under sunlight . While mainly occurring after dermal exposure, such reactions have also been reported after consumption of large quantities of certain vegetables containing high levels of furocoumarins. Many types of beans contain toxins called lectins, and kidney beans have the highest concentrations – especially red kidney beans. As few as 4 or 5 raw beans can cause severe stomachache, vomiting and diarrhoea. Lectins are destroyed when the dried beans are soaked for at least 12 hours and then boiled vigorously for at least 10 minutes in water. Tinned kidney beans have already had this process applied and so can be used without further treatment.
Mycotoxins are naturally occurring toxic compounds produced by certain types of moulds. Moulds that can produce mycotoxins grow on numerous foodstuffs such as cereals, dried fruits, nuts and spices. Mould growth can occur before harvest or after harvest, during storage, on/in the food itself often under warm, damp and humid conditions.
Most mycotoxins are chemically stable and survive food processing. The effects of food-borne mycotoxins can be acute with symptoms of severe illness and even death appearing quickly after consumption of highly contaminated food products. Long term effects on health of chronic mycotoxin exposure include the induction of cancers and immune deficiency.
All solanacea plants, which include tomatoes, potatoes, and eggplants, contain natural toxins called solanines and chaconine . While levels are generally low, higher concentrations are found in potato sprouts and bitter-tasting peel and green parts, as well as in green tomatoes. The plants produce the toxins in response to stresses like bruising, UV light, microorganisms and attacks from insect pests and herbivores. To reduce the production of solanines and chaconine it is important to store potatoes in a dark, cool and dry place, and not to eat green or sprouting parts.
Wild mushrooms may contain several toxins, such as muscimol and muscarine, which can cause vomiting, diarrhoea, confusion, visual disturbances, salivation, and hallucinations. Onset of symptoms occurs 6–24 hours or more after ingestion of mushrooms. Fatal poisoning is usually associated with delayed onset of symptoms which are very severe, with toxic effect on the liver, kidney and nervous systems. Cooking or peeling does not inactivate the toxins. It is recommended to avoid any wild mushrooms, unless definitively identified as non-poisonous.
Pyrrolizidine Alkaloids are toxins produced by an estimated 600 plant species. The main plant sources are the families Boraginaceae, Asteraceae and Fabaceae. Many of these are weeds that can grow in fields and contaminate food crops. PAs can cause a variety of adverse health effects; they can be acutely toxic and of main concern is the DNA-damaging potential of certain PAs, potentially leading to cancer.
PAs are stable during processing, and have been detected in herbal teas, honey, herbs and spices and other food products, such as cereals and cereal products. Human exposure is estimated to be low, however. Due to the complexity of the subject and the large number of related compounds, the overall health risk has not been fully evaluated yet. Guidance is under development by the FAO/WHO Codex Committee on Contaminants in Food on management strategies to prevent PA-containing plants from entering the food chain.
When it comes to natural toxins it is important to note that they can be present in a variety of different crops and foodstuff. In a usual balanced, healthy diet, the levels of natural toxins are well below the threshold for acute and chronic toxicity.
To minimize the health risk from natural toxins in food, people are advised to: WHO, in collaboration with FAO, is responsible for assessing the risks to humans of natural toxins – through contamination in food – and for recommending adequate protections. Risk assessments of natural toxins in food done by the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives are used by governments and by the Codex Alimentarius Commission to establish maximum levels in food or provide other risk management advice to control or prevent contamination. Codex standards are the international reference for national food supplies and for trade in food, so that people everywhere can be confident that the food they buy meets the agreed standards for safety and quality, no matter where it was produced. JECFA or ad hoc FAO/WHO scientific expert groups consist of independent, international experts who conduct scientific reviews of all available studies and other relevant data on specific natural toxins. The outcome of such health risk assessments can either be a maximum tolerable intake level, or other guidance to indicate the level of health concern , including advice on risk management measures to prevent and control contamination, and on the analytical methods and monitoring and control activities.
Related
Fact sheets

========================================
newborn-mortality
========================================
Globally 2.3 million children died in the first 28 days of life in 2022. There are approximately 6500 newborn deaths every day, amounting to 47% of all child deaths under the age of 5 years.
The world has made substantial progress in child survival since 1990. Globally, the number of neonatal deaths declined from 5.0 million in 1990 to 2.3 million in 2022. However, the decline in neonatal mortality from 1990 to 2022 has been slower than that of post-neonatal under-5 mortality. Moreover, the gains have reduced significantly since 2010, and 64 countries will fall short of meeting the Sustainable Development Goals target for neonatal mortality by 2030 unless urgent action is taken.
Children continue to face different chances of survival based on where they are born, with sub-Saharan Africa and southern and central Asia bearing the heaviest burden for newborn deaths. Sub-Saharan Africa had the highest neonatal mortality rate in 2022 at 27 deaths per 1000 live births, followed by central and southern Asia with 21 deaths per 1000 live births. In sub-Saharan Africa the risk of death in the first month of life is 11 times higher than that in the lowest-mortality region, Australia and New Zealand. At country level, NMRs in 2022 ranged from 0.7 death per 1000 live births to 39.4 deaths per 1000 live births, and the risk of dying before the 28th day of life for a child born in the highest-mortality country was about 60 times greater than in the lowest-mortality country. Most neonatal deaths occur during the first week of life, and about 1 million newborns die within the first 24 hours. Among neonates, the leading causes of death include premature birth, birth complications , neonatal infections and congenital anomalies, which collectively account for almost 4 in every 10 deaths in children under 5 years of age. It is worth noting that although the rates for the leading causes of neonatal deaths have declined globally since 2000, they accounted for the same proportion of under-5 deaths – 4 in 10 – in 2000 and 2022. Access to and availability of quality health care continues to be a matter of life or death for mothers and newborns globally.
The vast majority of newborn deaths take place in low and middle-income countries. Plans to improve newborn survival should be built on a strong foundation of essential newborn care and align with the Every Newborn Action Plan and Ending Preventable Maternal Mortality targets on antenatal care, postnatal care, skilled health personnel and emergency obstetric and newborn care. Increasing financing and allocating resources towards two very high-impact but high-cost interventions – care for small and sick newborns and emergency obstetric care – are critical, as these measures provide quadruple returns on investment by reducing maternal deaths, stillbirths, newborn deaths and both maternal and newborn morbidity. In settings with well-functioning midwife programmes, the provision of midwife-led continuity of care can reduce preterm births by up to 24%. MLCC is a model of care in which a midwife or a team of midwives provide care to the same woman throughout her pregnancy, childbirth and the postnatal period, calling upon medical support if necessary. With the increase in facility births , there is a great opportunity for providing essential newborn care and identifying and managing high risk newborns. However, few women and newborns stay in the facility for the recommended 24 hours after birth, which is the most critical time when complications can present. In addition, too many newborns die at home because of early discharge from the hospital, barriers to access and delays in seeking care. The four recommended postnatal care contacts delivered at health facility or through home visits play a key role to reach these newborns and their families.
Accelerated progress for neonatal survival and promotion of health and well-being requires strengthening quality of care as well as ensuring availability of quality health services or the small and sick newborn.
All babies should receive the following:
Families should be advised to:
Some newborns require additional attention and care during hospitalization and at home to minimize their health risks.
Low-birthweight and preterm babies:
If a low-birth weight newborn is identified at home, the family should be helped in locating a hospital or facility to care for the baby. Care should include:
Sick newborns:
Danger signs should be identified as soon as possible in health facilities or at home and the baby referred to the appropriate service for further diagnosis and care.
If a sick newborn is identified at home, the family should be helped in locating a hospital or facility to care for the baby.
Newborns of HIV-infected mothers:
Care should include:
WHO is working with ministries of health and partners to: Related
WHO's work on newborn health News
Fact sheets
Feature stories

========================================
nipah-virus
========================================
Nipah virus is a zoonotic virus and can also be transmitted through contaminated food or directly between people. In infected people, it causes a range of illnesses from asymptomatic infection to acute respiratory illness and fatal encephalitis. The virus can also cause severe disease in animals such as pigs, resulting in significant economic losses for farmers. Although Nipah virus has caused only a few known outbreaks in Asia, it infects a wide range of animals and causes severe disease and death in people, making it a public health concern.
Nipah virus was first recognized in 1999 during an outbreak among pig farmers in, Malaysia. No new outbreaks have been reported in Malaysia since 1999. It was also recognized in Bangladesh in 2001, and nearly annual outbreaks have occurred in that country since. The disease has also been identified periodically in eastern India.
Other regions may be at risk for infection, as evidence of the virus has been found in the known natural reservoir and several other bat species in a number of countries, including Cambodia, Ghana, Indonesia, Madagascar, the Philippines, and Thailand.
During the first recognized outbreak in Malaysia, which also affected Singapore, most human infections resulted from direct contact with sick pigs or their contaminated tissues. Transmission is thought to have occurred via unprotected exposure to secretions from the pigs, or unprotected contact with the tissue of a sick animal.
In subsequent outbreaks in Bangladesh and India, consumption of fruits or fruit products contaminated with urine or saliva from infected fruit bats was the most likely source of infection.
There are currently no studies on viral persistence in bodily fluids or the environment including fruits.
Human-to-human transmission of Nipah virus has also been reported among family and care givers of infected patients.
During the later outbreaks in Bangladesh and India, Nipah virus spread directly from human-to-human through close contact with people's secretions and excretions. In Siliguri, India in 2001, transmission of the virus was also reported within a health-care setting, where 75% of cases occurred among hospital staff or visitors. From 2001 to 2008, around half of reported cases in Bangladesh were due to human-to-human transmission through providing care to infected patients.
Human infections range from asymptomatic infection to acute respiratory infection , and fatal encephalitis.
Infected people initially develop symptoms including fever, headaches, myalgia , vomiting and sore throat. This can be followed by dizziness, drowsiness, altered consciousness, and neurological signs that indicate acute encephalitis. Some people can also experience atypical pneumonia and severe respiratory problems, including acute respiratory distress. Encephalitis and seizures occur in severe cases, progressing to coma within 24 to 48 hours. The incubation period is believed to range from 4 to 14 days. However, an incubation period as long as 45 days has been reported.
Most people who survive acute encephalitis make a full recovery, but long term neurologic conditions have been reported in survivors. Approximately 20% of patients are left with residual neurological consequences such as seizure disorder and personality changes. A small number of people who recover subsequently relapse or develop delayed onset encephalitis.
The case fatality rate is estimated at 40% to 75%. This rate can vary by outbreak depending on local capabilities for epidemiological surveillance and clinical management.
Initial signs and symptoms of Nipah virus infection are nonspecific, and the diagnosis is often not suspected at the time of presentation. This can hinder accurate diagnosis and creates challenges in outbreak detection, effective and timely infection control measures, and outbreak response activities. In addition, the quality, quantity, type, timing of clinical sample collection and the time needed to transfer samples to the laboratory can affect the accuracy of laboratory results.
Nipah virus infection can be diagnosed with clinical history during the acute and convalescent phase of the disease. The main tests used are real time polymerase chain reaction from bodily fluids and antibody detection via enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay . Other tests used include polymerase chain reaction assay, and virus isolation by cell culture.
There are currently no drugs or vaccines specific for Nipah virus infection although WHO has identified Nipah as a priority disease for the WHO Research and Development Blueprint. Intensive supportive care is recommended to treat severe respiratory and neurologic complications.
Fruit bats of the family Pteropodidae – particularly species belonging to the Pteropus genus – are the natural hosts for Nipah virus. There is no apparent disease in fruit bats.
It is assumed that the geographic distribution of Henipaviruses overlaps with that of Pteropus category. This hypothesis was reinforced with the evidence of Henipavirus infection in Pteropus bats from Australia, Bangladesh, Cambodia, China, India, Indonesia, Madagascar, Malaysia, Papua New Guinea, Thailand and Timor-Leste.
African fruit bats of the genus Eidolon, family Pteropodidae, were found positive for antibodies against Nipah and Hendra viruses, indicating that these viruses might be present within the geographic distribution of Pteropodidae bats in Africa.
Outbreaks of the Nipah virus in pigs and other domestic animals such as horses, goats, sheep, cats and dogs were first reported during the initial Malaysian outbreak in 1999.
The virus is highly contagious in pigs. Pigs are infectious during the incubation period, which lasts from 4 to 14 days.
An infected pig can exhibit no symptoms, but some develop acute feverish illness, labored breathing, and neurological symptoms such as trembling, twitching and muscle spasms. Generally, mortality is low except in young piglets. These symptoms are not dramatically different from other respiratory and neurological illnesses of pigs. Nipah virus should be suspected if pigs also have an unusual barking cough or if human cases of encephalitis are present.
For more information of Nipah in animals, see the World Organization for Animal Health webpage on Nipah.
Controlling Nipah virus in pigs
Currently, there are no vaccines available against Nipah virus. Based on the experience gained during the outbreak of Nipah involving pig farms in 1999, routine and thorough cleaning and disinfection of pig farms with appropriate detergents may be effective in preventing infection.
If an outbreak is suspected, the animal premises should be quarantined immediately. Culling of infected animals – with close supervision of burial or incineration of carcasses – may be necessary to reduce the risk of transmission to people. Restricting or banning the movement of animals from infected farms to other areas can reduce the spread of the disease.
As Nipah virus outbreaks have involved pigs and/or fruit bats, establishing an animal health/wildlife surveillance system, using a One Health approach, to detect Nipah cases is essential in providing early warning for veterinary and human public health authorities. In the absence of a vaccine, the only way to reduce or prevent infection in people is by raising awareness of the risk factors and educating people about the measures they can take to reduce exposure to the Nipah virus.
Public health educational messages should focus on:
Health-care workers caring for patients with suspected or confirmed infection, or handling specimens from them, should implement standard infection control precautions at all times
As human-to-human transmission has been reported, in particular in health-care settings, contact and droplet precautions should be used in addition to standard precautions. Airborne precautions may be required in certain circumstances.
Samples taken from people and animals with suspected Nipah virus infection should be handled by trained staff working in suitably equipped laboratories.
WHO is supporting affected and at risk countries with technical guidance on how to manage outbreaks of Nipah virus and on how to prevent their occurrence.
The risk of international transmission via fruits or fruit products contaminated with urine or saliva from infected fruit bats can be prevented by washing them thoroughly and peeling them before consumption. Fruit with signs of bat bites should be discarded.
Related
R&D Blueprint and Nipah virus

========================================
noma
========================================
Noma is a rapidly progressing severe gangrenous disease of the mouth and the face. It mostly affects children aged 2–6 years suffering from malnutrition, affected by infectious diseases, living in extreme poverty with poor oral health or with weakened immune systems (1). Noma can also occur among immunocompromised adults due to HIV, leukaemia and other diseases (2).
The disease, also called cancrum oris or gangrenous stomatitis, is mostly found in sub-Saharan Africa, although cases have also been reported in Latin America, Asia and other regions. Noma starts as a soft tissue lesion of the gums. It then develops into an acute necrotizing gingivitis that progresses rapidly, destroying the soft tissues and further progressing to involve the hard tissues and skin of the face. Noma is generally considered an opportunistic and non-contagious disease. Survivors suffer from severe facial disfigurement, have difficulty speaking and eating, endure social stigma, and require complex surgery and rehabilitation. When noma is detected at an early stage, its progression can be rapidly halted through basic hygiene, antibiotics and improved nutrition.
Accurate estimation of the number of noma cases is challenging due to the rapid progression of the disease, high case fatality rate, weak health systems and epidemiological surveillance, changing or varying disease definitions, substantial social stigma, and a lack of awareness of noma by healthcare workers and caregivers. The WHO global incidence, prevalence and case fatality figures from 1998 remain the most widely cited, but methodological limitations mean that the true magnitude of noma’s burden and the quantification of noma survivors is largely unknown. Recent evidence suggests that the reported noma case fatality rate could now be less than 90%, and it can be greatly reduced with early treatment (2). Since the early 2000s over 13 000 cases of noma have been reported in scientific literature. Their distribution indicates that the disease is prevalent beyond the so-called noma belt, an area of the African continent stretching from Mauritania to Ethiopia. Indeed, cases are seen in African countries outside this area as well as in other parts of the world, including Asia and Asia-Pacific, the Americas, the Middle East and Europe (3).
Noma is a marker of absolute poverty. In 2012, the UN Human Rights Council acknowledged that the neglect from which noma is affected may amount to a violation of basic child rights. The Council made a comprehensive set of recommendations in line with the strategies of the WHO Regional Office for Africa Noma Control Programme (4).
Limitations exist in our current understanding of the aetiology and pathogenesis of noma. Evidence indicates that the causative agents of noma are non-specific polymicrobial organisms. There is also a wide range of associated risk factors reported: research highlights that the disease is linked with malnutrition, other causes of immunosuppression, underlying infections, poor oral health and extreme poverty. Noma is considered an opportunistic and non-contagious disease: there is no documented evidence to support direct transmission from person to person.
Noma is diagnosed using clinical criteria that differ according to the different stages of progress. There is currently no point of care diagnostic test. WHO classifies noma into 5 clinical stages: stage 0 – simple gingivitis ; stage 1 – acute necrotizing gingivitis; stage 2 – oedema; stage 3 – gangrene; stage 4 – scarring; and stage 5 – sequelae. Early detection is essential, as therapy is most effective at the early stages of disease when it appears as aggressively swollen gums . Treatment typically includes prescription of widely available antibiotics, advice and support on practices to improve oral hygiene, disinfectant mouthwash , and nutrition supplements. If diagnosed during the early stages of the disease, treatment can lead to proper wound healing and no long-term sequelae. More severe cases may warrant surgical intervention and wound dressing. Once noma reaches the gangrenous stage of the disease with a visible hole in the face, it is likely that children who survive will suffer severe facial disfigurement, have difficulty eating and speaking, face social stigma and isolation, and need reconstructive surgery.
After the inception of WHO's programme to control noma in 1994, the WHO Oral Health Programme has led global and regional noma control efforts including the implementation of the Regional Noma Control Programme in eleven priority countries in the WHO African Region. This programme focuses on strengthening and developing the capacities of health workers, social actors and communities to prevent, promptly detect and manage cases of noma. Improved awareness of the disease among populations and mental health counselling helps to remove stigma and enhances the reintegration of noma survivors and their families into society. Integration of noma into existing health surveillance systems can improve data availability and accessibility and strengthen the leadership of ministries of health through improved inter- and multisectoral collaboration. Moreover, WHO has encouraged Member States to take a more integrated approach to preventing and controlling noma, caused by a range of modifiable risk factors, and their underlying social determinants shared with NTDs.
Following a recommendation of the Strategic and Technical Advisory Group for Neglected Tropical Diseases , noma was added to the WHO list of NTDs in December 2023, with a view to integrate noma within the road map for neglected tropical diseases 2021–2030. Through this process WHO is committed to support advocacy efforts, mobilization of resources for research and development and implementation of interventions directed against noma, in coordination with NTD programmes at national level. Even prior to this decision, noma was linked to fieldwork implemented against the skin NTDs , and was included in technical products and resources such as the OpenWHO course on tropical dermatology and the SkinNTD mobile application. A dedicated online course on noma is currently available in English, French, Hausa, Hindi, and Portuguese.
References
1. Srour, M. L., Marck, K., & Baratti-Mayer, D. Noma: Overview of a Neglected Disease and Human Rights Violation. The American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 2017, 96(2), 268–274.
2. Maguire B et al. An updated systematic review of the evidence-based knowledge on the distribution, associated risk factors, the prevention and treatment modalities for Noma. Oxford: Infectious Diseases Data Observatory ; 2023.
3. Galli A, Brugger C, Fürst T, Monnier N, Winkler MS, Steinmann P. Prevalence, incidence, and reported global distribution of noma: a systematic literature review. Lancet Infectious Diseases, 2022, 15:S1473-3099(21)00698-8.
4. United Nations. Human Rights Council. Advisory Committee. Study of the Human Rights Council Advisory Committee on severe malnutrition and childhood diseases with children affected by noma as an example, A/HRC/19/73, Geneva: UN, 24 February 2012. https://digitallibrary.un.org/record/722000
Related
WHO's work on oral health
WHO's work on neglected tropical diseases
Global oral health status report: towards universal health coverage for oral health by 2030
Technical Guidelines for Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response in the African Region: Third edition
Ending the neglect to attain the Sustainable Development Goals: a strategic framework for integrated control and management of skin-related neglected tropical diseases
Ending the neglect to attain the Sustainable Development Goals: A road map for neglected tropical diseases 2021–2030
WHO Academy CourseNoma: Training of health workers at national and district levels on skin-NTDs
News
Fact sheets
Feature stories
Events
More
Nigeria seeks to eliminate severe and often lethal mouth disease Nigeria seeks to eliminate severe and often lethal mouth disease

========================================
noncommunicable-diseases
========================================
Key facts
Noncommunicable diseases , also known as chronic diseases, tend to be of long duration and are the result of a combination of genetic, physiological, environmental and behavioural factors.
The main types of NCDs are cardiovascular diseases , cancers, chronic respiratory diseases and diabetes.
NCDs disproportionately affect people in low- and middle-income countries, where nearly three quarters of global NCD deaths occur.
People of all age groups, regions and countries are affected by NCDs. These conditions are often associated with older age groups, but about 18 million NCD deaths occur before the age of 70 years. NCDs cause more deaths in this age group than all other causes of death combined. Of these premature deaths, 82% are estimated to occur in low- and middle-income countries. Children, adults and the elderly are all vulnerable to the risk factors contributing to NCDs, whether from unhealthy diets, physical inactivity, exposure to tobacco smoke, or the harmful use of alcohol or air pollution.
Unhealthy diets and a lack of physical activity may show up in people as raised blood pressure, increased blood glucose, elevated blood lipids and obesity. These are called metabolic risk factors and can lead to cardiovascular disease, the leading NCD in terms of premature deaths.
Behavioural risk factors increase the risk of NCDS, including:
The social, commercial, and physical environment are key drivers of these behaviours.
Behavioural risk factors contribute to four key metabolic changes that increase the risk of NCDs:
In terms of attributable deaths, the leading metabolic risk factor globally is elevated blood pressure (1), followed by raised blood glucose and overweight and obesity.
Several environmental risk factors contribute to NCDs. Air pollution – indoor and outdoor – is the largest of these, accounting for 6.7 million deaths globally, of which about 5.6 million are due to NCDs, including stroke, ischaemic heart disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and lung cancer.
NCDs threaten progress towards the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which includes a target of reducing the probability of death from any of the four main NCDs between ages 30 and 70 years by one third by 2030.
Poverty is closely linked with NCDs. The rapid rise in NCDs is predicted to impede poverty reduction initiatives in low-income countries, particularly by increasing household costs associated with health care. Vulnerable and socially disadvantaged people get sicker and die sooner than people of higher socio-economic positions, especially because they may have limited access to health services. To reduce these inequities, governments must invest in health systems that respond to users’ expectations and needs.
An important way to control NCDs is to focus on reducing the risk factors associated with these diseases. Low-cost solutions exist for governments and other stakeholders to reduce the common modifiable risk factors. Monitoring progress and trends of NCDs and their risk is important for guiding policy and priorities.
To lessen the impact of NCDs on individuals and society, a comprehensive approach is needed requiring all sectors, including health, finance, transport, education, agriculture, planning and others, to collaborate to reduce the risks associated with NCDs, and to promote interventions to prevent and control them.
Investing in better management of NCDs is critical. Management of NCDs includes detecting, screening and treating these diseases, and providing access to palliative care for people in need. High impact essential NCD interventions can be delivered through a primary health care approach to strengthen early detection and timely treatment. Evidence shows such interventions are excellent economic investments because, if provided early to patients, they can reduce the need for more expensive treatment. Countries with inadequate health care coverage are unlikely to provide universal access to essential NCD interventions. NCD management interventions are essential for achieving the SDG target on NCDs.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development recognizes NCDs as a major challenge for sustainable development. As part of the Agenda, heads of state and government committed to develop ambitious national responses, by 2030, to reduce by one third premature mortality from NCDs through prevention and treatment . WHO plays a key leadership role in the coordination and promotion of the global fight against NCDs and the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals target 3.4.
In 2019, the World Health Assembly extended the WHO Global action plan for the prevention and control of NCDs 2013–2020 to 2030 and called for the development of an Implementation Roadmap 2023 to 2030 to accelerate progress on preventing and controlling NCDs. The Roadmap supports actions to achieve a set of nine global targets with the greatest impact towards prevention and management of NCDs. (1) Global Burden of Disease Collaborative Network, Global Burden of Disease Study 2021 Results https://vizhub.healthdata.org/gbd-results/
Related
Noncommunicable diseases quiz Video: WHO - uniting UN Agencies against NCDs in Kenya
News
More
PublicationsGlobal Action Plan for the Prevention and Control of NCDs 2013–2020WHO Global status report on noncommunicable diseases 2014Related linksWHO's work on noncommunicable diseasesMore about noncommunicable diseasesData on noncommunicable diseasesFramework for Developing Dialysis Programs in Low-resource Settings
Publications
Related links

========================================
nursing-and-midwifery
========================================
Nurses and midwives are central to Primary Health Care and are often the first and sometimes the only health professional that people see and the quality of their initial assessment, care and treatment is vital. They are also part of their local community – sharing its culture, strengths and vulnerabilities – and can shape and deliver effective interventions to meet the needs of patients, families and communities.
WHO response
WHO’s work relating to nursing and midwifery is currently directed by World Health Assembly resolution WHA74.15 which calls on WHO Member States and WHO to strengthen nursing and midwifery through the Global Strategic Directions for Nursing and Midwifery 2021–2025. The SDNM is an interrelated set of policy priorities that can help countries to ensure that midwives and nurses optimally contribute to achieving universal health coverage and other population health goals .
The SDNM comprises four policy focus areas: education, jobs, leadership, and service delivery Each area has a “strategic direction” articulating a goal for the five-year period,and includes between two and four policy priorities If enacted and sustained, these policy priorities can support advancement along the four strategic directions: 1) educating enough midwives and nurses with competencies to meet population health needs; 2) creating jobs, managing migration, and recruiting and retaining midwives and nurses where they are most needed; 3) strengthening nursing and midwifery leadership throughout health and academic systems; and 4) ensuring midwives and nurses are supported, respected, protected, motivated and equipped to safely and optimally contribute in their service delivery settings.
WHO engages ministries of health, the Government Chief Nurses and Midwives and other relevant stakeholders to enable effective planning, coordination and management of nursing and midwifery programmes in countries. The Global Forum for the Government Chief Nurses and Midwives, established in 2004, is organized by WHO and meets every two years. It is a Forum for senior nursing and midwifery officials to develop and inform areas of shared interest. WHO also engages with academic institutions specialised in nursing and midwifery. Forty-seven academic centres are designated as Collaborating Centres for Nursing and Midwifery with WHO. The academic centres are affiliated to the Global Network of WHO Collaborating Centres for Nursing and Midwifery.
WHO has established a Nursing and Midwifery Global Community of Practice . This is a virtual network created to provide a forum for nurses and midwives around the world to collaborate and network with each other, with WHO and with other key stakeholders (e.g WHO collaborating centres for nursing and midwifery, WHO Academy, Nursing and Midwifery Associations and Institutions.) The network will provide discussion forums, a live lecture programme, opportunities to develop and share policies, WHO documents and tools, and facilitated innovation workshops, masterclasses and webinars. The Nursing and Midwifery Global Community of Practice is free to join and available to nurses and midwives everywhere. From May 2022 it will be possible to access the virtual community via a smartphone, by downloading the Nursing and Midwifery Global Community of Practice App Nurses Beyond the Bedside_WHO_CSW66 Side Eventavailable for Android and IOS system via the APP store. A 2017 Report on the history of nursing and midwifery in the World Health Organization 1948–2017, demonstrates how WHO, since its inception, has given this workforce a voice, and highlights the critical role nurses and midwives play in improving health outcomes across the world.
References
Related
News
Documents
More
WHO resolutions on nursing and midwiferyWHA64.6 - Health workforce strengtheningWHA64.7 - Strengthening nursing and midwiferyWHA59.27 - Strengthening nursing and midwifery

========================================
obesity-and-overweight
========================================
Overweight is a condition of excessive fat deposits. Obesity is a chronic complex disease defined by excessive fat deposits that can impair health. Obesity can lead to increased risk of type 2 diabetes and heart disease, it can affect bone health and reproduction, it increases the risk of certain cancers. Obesity influences the quality of living, such as sleeping or moving.
The diagnosis of overweight and obesity is made by measuring people’s weight and height and by calculating the body mass index : weight (kg)/height² (m²). The body mass index is a surrogate marker of fatness and additional measurements, such as the waist circumference, can help the diagnosis of obesity.
The BMI categories for defining obesity vary by age and gender in infants, children and adolescents.
For adults, WHO defines overweight and obesity as follows:
For children, age needs to be considered when defining overweight and obesity. For children under 5 years of age:
Charts and tables: WHO child growth standards for children aged under 5 years Overweight and obesity are defined as follows for children aged between 5–19 years: Charts and tables: WHO growth reference for children aged between 5–19 years In 2022, 2.5 billion adults aged 18 years and older were overweight, including over 890 million adults who were living with obesity. This corresponds to 43% of adults aged 18 years and over who were overweight; an increase from 1990, when 25% of adults aged 18 years and over were overweight. Prevalence of overweight varied by region, from 31% in the WHO South-East Asia Region and the African Region to 67% in the Region of the Americas.
About 16% of adults aged 18 years and older worldwide were obese in 2022. The worldwide prevalence of obesity more than doubled between 1990 and 2022.
In 2024, an estimated 35 million children under the age of 5 years were overweight. Once considered a high-income country problem, overweight is on the rise in low- and middle-income countries. In Africa, the number of overweight children under 5 years has increased by nearly 12.1% since 2000. Almost half of the children under 5 years who were overweight or living with obesity in 2024 lived in Asia.
Over 390 million children and adolescents aged 5–19 years were overweight in 2022. The prevalence of overweight among children and adolescents aged 5–19 has risen dramatically from just 8% in 1990 to 20% in 2022. The rise has occurred similarly among both boys and girls: in 2022 19% of girls and 21% of boys were overweight.
While just 2% of children and adolescents aged 5–19 were obese in 1990 , by 2022, 8% of children and adolescents were living with obesity .
Overweight and obesity result from an imbalance of energy intake and energy expenditure . In most cases obesity is a multifactorial disease due to obesogenic environments, psycho-social factors and genetic variants. In a subgroup of patients, single major etiological factors can be identified . The obesogenic environment exacerbating the likelihood of obesity in individuals, populations and in different settings is related to structural factors limiting the availability of healthy sustainable food at locally affordable prices, lack of safe and easy physical mobility into the daily life of all people, and absence of adequate legal and regulatory environment. At the same time, the lack of an effective health system response to identify excess weight gain and fat deposition in their early stages is aggravating the progression to obesity. The health risks caused by overweight and obesity are increasingly well documented and understood. In 2021, higher-than-optimal BMI caused an estimated 3.7 million deaths from noncommunicable diseases such as cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, cancers, neurological disorders, chronic respiratory diseases, and digestive disorders (1). Being overweight in childhood and adolescence affects children’s and adolescents’ immediate health and is associated with greater risk and earlier onset of various NCDs, such as type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease. Childhood and adolescent obesity have adverse psychosocial consequences; it affects school performance and quality of life, compounded by stigma, discrimination and bullying. Children with obesity are very likely to be adults with obesity and are also at a higher risk of developing NCDs in adulthood.
The economic impacts of the obesity epidemic are also important. If nothing is done, the global costs of overweight and obesity are predicted to reach US$ 3 trillion per year by 2030 and more than US$ 18 trillion by 2060 (2). Finally, the rise in obesity rates in low-and middle-income countries, including among lower socio-economic groups, is fast globalizing a problem that was once associated only with high-income countries. Many low- and middle-income countries face a so-called double burden of malnutrition.
While these countries continue to deal with the problems of infectious diseases and undernutrition, they are also experiencing a rapid upsurge in noncommunicable disease risk factors such as obesity and overweight.
It is common to find undernutrition and obesity co-existing within the same country, the same community and the same household.
Children in low- and middle-income countries are more vulnerable to inadequate pre-natal, infant, and young child nutrition. At the same time, these children are exposed to high-fat, high-sugar, high-salt, energy-dense, and micronutrient-poor foods, which tend to be lower in cost but also lower in nutrient quality. These dietary patterns, in conjunction with lower levels of physical activity, result in sharp increases in childhood obesity while undernutrition issues remain unsolved.
Overweight and obesity, as well as their related noncommunicable diseases, are largely preventable and manageable. At the individual level, people may be able to reduce their risk by adopting preventive interventions at each step of the life cycle, starting from pre-conception and continuing during the early years. These include: Health practitioners need to The dietary and physical activity patterns for individual people are largely the result of environmental and societal conditions that greatly constrain personal choice. Obesity is a societal rather than an individual responsibility, with the solutions to be found through the creation of supportive environments and communities that embed healthy diets and regular physical activity as the most accessible, available and affordable behaviours of daily life. Stopping the rise in obesity demands multisectoral actions such as food manufacturing, marketing and pricing and others that seek to address the wider determinants of health . Such policies and actions include: The food industry can play a significant role in promoting healthy diets by: WHO has recognized the need to tackle the global obesity crisis in an urgent manner for many years. The World Health Assembly Global Nutrition Targets aiming to ensure no increase in childhood overweight, and the NCD target to halt the rise of diabetes and obesity by 2025, were endorsed by WHO Member States. They recognized that accelerated global action is needed to address pervasive and corrosive problem of the double burden of malnutrition. At the 75th World Health Assembly in 2022, Member States demanded and adopted new recommendations for the prevention and management of obesity and endorsed the WHO Acceleration plan to stop obesity. Since its endorsement, the Acceleration plan has shaped the political environment to generate impetus needed for sustainable change, created a platform to shape, streamline and prioritize policy, support implementation in countries and drive impact and strengthen accountability at national and global level. References
1. GBD 2021 Risk Factor Collaborators. “Global Burden of 88 Risk Factors in 204 Countries and Territories, 1990–2021: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease study 2021”. Lancet. 2024; 403:2162-2203.
2. Okunogbe et al., “Economic Impacts of Overweight and Obesity.” 2nd Edition with Estimates for 161 Countries. World Obesity Federation, 2022.
Related
News
Fact sheets
More
DataGlobal Health Observatory More informationWHO's work on obesityWHO's work on nutrition

========================================
occupational-health--health-workers
========================================
Health workers are all people engaged in work actions whose primary intent is to improve health, including doctors, nurses, midwives, public health professionals, laboratory technicians, health technicians, medical and non-medical technicians, personal care workers, community health workers, healers and traditional medicine practitioners. The term also includes health management and support workers such as cleaners, drivers, hospital administrators, district health managers and social workers, and other occupational groups in health-related activities as defined by the International Standard Classification of Occupations .
Health workers are the backbone of any functioning health system. While contributing to the enjoyment of the right to health for all, health workers should also enjoy the right to healthy and safe working conditions to maintain their own health. Health workers face a range of occupational risks associated with infections, unsafe patient handling, hazardous chemicals, radiation, heat and noise, psychosocial hazards, violence and harassment, injuries, inadequate provision of safe water, sanitation and hygiene.
The protection of health and safety of health workers should be part of the core business of the health sector: to protect and restore health without causing harm to patients and workers.
Safeguarding the health, safety and well-being of health workers can prevent diseases and injuries caused by work, while improving the quality and safety of care, human resources for health and environmental sustainability in the health sector. The protection of health and safety of health workers contributes to improving the productivity, job satisfaction and retention of health workers. It also facilitates the regulatory compliance of health facilities with national laws and regulations on occupational health and safety, bearing in mind the specific working conditions and occupational hazards in the sector. Unsafe working conditions resulting in occupational illness, injuries and absenteeism represent a significant financial cost for the health sector. For instance, in 2017 the annual costs of occupational illnesses and injuries in the health care and social services sector in Great Britain were the highest among all sectors, estimated at the equivalent of US$ 3.38 billion (1). Globally, improving health, safety and well-being of health workers lowers the costs of occupational harm and contributes to minimizing patient harm (2). Furthermore, implementing key interventions to protect the health and safety of health workers contributes to increasing the resilience of health services in the face of outbreaks and public health emergencies and contribute to strengthening the performance of health systems through: 1) preventing occupational diseases and injuries; and 2) protecting and promoting the health, safety and well-being of health workers, thereby improving the quality and safety of patient care, health workforce management and environmental sustainability.
Only one third of countries have some national policy instrument to protect health, safety and well-being of health workers. Based on the experience of such countries, the following policy interventions have been demonstrated to be beneficial in the protection of health workers: While employers have the overall responsibility for ensuring that all necessary preventive and protective measures are taken to minimize occupational risks, health workers have the responsibility to cooperate with the management and participate in the measures for protecting their health, safety and well-being. Health workers have the right to remove themselves from a work situation that they have reasonable justification to believe presents an imminent and serious danger to their lives or health. When a staff member exercises this right, he or she shall be protected from any undue consequences. In 2022, with resolution WHA74.14 on protecting, safeguarding and investing in the health and care workforce, the World Health Assembly called upon Member States “to take the necessary steps to safeguard and protect health and care workers at all levels”. The global patient safety action plan 2021–2030, adopted by the 74th World Health Assembly, includes action on health worker safety as priority for patient safety. WHO’s work on protecting the health, safety and well-being of health workers includes:
WHO and ILO have jointly issued a guide on the development and implementation of occupational health and safety programmes for health workers and work with international partners to build capacities for its implementation in countries.
WHO also provides guidelines and recommendations about prevention and management of occupational hazards in the health care sector. Related
WHO's work on occupational health
Tools and toolkits
Occupational hazards in the health sector
Publications
Caring for those who care: Guide for the development and implementation of occupational health and safety programmes for health workers
Caring for those who care: national programmes for occupational health for health workers. World Health Organization/International Labour Organization policy brief
Protection of health and safety of health workers: checklist for health care facilities
Interim guidance on occupational health for health workers in COVID-19
ILO/WHO toolkit on work improvement in healthcare facilities – a trainers guide and action manual
Activities
Protecting health and safety of health workers
Online training courses
Rapid Response Teams Essentials Online Learning Programme. Module 8: Responder well-being and ethics in emergency preparedness and response
Slides
Occupational hazards in the health sector
Development and implementation of occupational health and safety programmes for health workers
Key elements of occupational health and safety programmes for health workers
News
Fact sheets

========================================
older-children-and-young-adolescent-mortality-(5-to-14-years)
========================================
Globally, mortality falls from the peak at under 5, to a low in 10–­­14year-olds, then increases again for older adolescents and young adults. While the level of mortality differs considerably between regions, this age pattern is generally consistent across regions except for Australia and New Zealand, Europe and North America, and Latin America and the Caribbean, which see the lowest mortality among those aged 5–9 years. However, survival chances for older children and young adolescents vary greatly across the world.
In sub-Saharan Africa, the probability of dying among those aged 5–14 years in 2020 was 26 deaths per 1000 children aged 5 years. Approximately 77% of deaths among those aged 5–14 years occurred in sub-Saharan Africa and South- East Asia, up from 72% in 1990. The average global probability of a 5-year-old dying before their 14th birthday was 8 times higher in sub-Saharan Africa than in the WHO Region of the Americas. While preterm birth, birth trauma and infectious diseases cause the most deaths in children under 5 years, injuries rank among the top causes of death and lifelong disability among older children and young adolescents aged 5–14 years. The patterns of death in those aged 5 to 14 years reflect the underlying risk profiles of the age groups, with a shift away from infectious diseases of childhood and towards accidents and injuries. Sex differences in mortality rates become apparent starting in adolescence, with males having higher mortality rates than females. The rise of injury deaths changes the nature of interventions to improve survival for those aged 5 to 14 years. There is a shift from health sector actions to prevent and treat the infectious diseases of early childhood towards other government sectors including education, transportation and road infrastructure, water and sanitation and law enforcement. These sectors need to work together to prevent premature mortality in older children and young adolescents.
The evidence on deaths directly attributable to COVID-19 infection is strongly age-dependent, with children and adolescents least effected. Children and young adolescents 5 to 14 years represent approximately 8% of the global cases and 0.1% of the global deaths .
Data from civil registration and vital statistic systems , health management information systems from 80 countries as well as specific country-wide monitoring systems indicate no significant deviation from expected mortality for 2020 in this age group and in some cases indicate fewer deaths than would be expected from historical data. As more data comes in from countries, and further analyses are performed, these results may change for 2021.
Actions across a range of government sectors including education, transportation and road infrastructure, water and sanitation and law enforcement are needed to prevent premature mortality in older children and young adolescents.
National governments will need to critically assess their countries’ older child and young adolescent health needs, determine the most appropriate evidence-based interventions to address them and then prioritize these within their national health programming. WHO helps by providing guidance on effective interventions, prioritization, programme planning, monitoring and evaluation and research areas to strengthen the response.

========================================
onchocerciasis
========================================
Onchocerciasis is transmitted to humans through the bite of an infected blackfly of the genus Simulium, which breeds in fast-flowing rivers and streams. The blackfly vector ingests microfilariae when it bites an infected person. Inside the fly, the microfilariae develop into infective larvae that are then transmitted to another human during subsequent bites. Once inside the human host, the larvae mature into adult worms, forming nodules under the skin. As they continue to mate and produce microfilariae, communities must be treated for a minimum of 10 to15 years to eliminate transmission, corresponding to the lifespan of the adult O. volvulus.
More than 99% of infected people live in Africa and Yemen; the remaining 1% live on the border between Brazil and Venezuela . In 2023 at least 249.5 million people required preventive treatment against onchocerciasis. The Global Burden of Disease Study estimated in 2017 that 14.6 million of the infected people already had skin disease and 1.15 million had vision loss.
Five countries have been verified by WHO as free of onchocerciasis after successfully implementing elimination activities for decades: four in the region of the Americas: Colombia , Ecuador , Mexico and Guatemala , and one in Africa: Niger In 2022, Senegal has stopped treatment and is now under post-treatment surveillance. Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Mali, Nigeria, Sudan, Tanzania, Togo, Uganda, and Venezuela have stopped MDA in at least one focus. Globally, 1.8 million people live in areas that no longer require MDA for onchocerciasis.
These milestones provide proof of concept that progress against neglected tropical diseases is possible across the entire African continent.
Detailed information on 2023 annual statistics can be accessed in the Weekly Epidemiological Record, 11 October 2024.
Onchocerciasis is an eye and skin disease. Symptoms are caused by the microfilariae, which move around the human body in the subcutaneous tissue and induce intense inflammatory responses when they die. Infected people may show symptoms such as severe itching and various skin changes. Infected people may also develop eye lesions which can lead to visual impairment and permanent blindness. In most cases, nodules under the skin form around the adult worms. Early exposure to O. volvulus infection is associated with epilepsy in children.
Between 1974 and 2002, onchocerciasis was brought under control in west Africa through the work of the Onchocerciasis Control Programme , using mainly the spraying of insecticides against blackfly larvae by helicopters and airplanes. This was later supplemented by large-scale distribution of ivermectin since 1989.
The African Programme for Onchocerciasis Control was launched in 1995 with the objective of controlling onchocerciasis in the remaining endemic countries in Africa and closed at the end of 2015 after beginning the transition to onchocerciasis elimination. Its main strategy was the establishment of sustainable community-directed treatment with ivermectin and vector control with environmentally-safe methods where appropriate. Building on the successes of OCP and APOC, the Expanded Special Project for Elimination of Neglected Tropical Diseases was launched by the WHO Regional Office for Africa to provide national NTD programmes with technical and fundraising support to help accelerate elimination of river blindness in African countries. National Onchocerciasis Elimination Committees have been established in 25 countries in Africa to develop and implement new strategies. The Global Onchocerciasis Network for Elimination was launched in January 2023 by WHO, its Member States and partners whose goal is to support countries to accelerate progress towards the achievement of the road map targets for onchocerciasis elimination. The Onchocerciasis Elimination Program for the Americas was launched in 1992 with the goal of eliminating morbidity and interrupting transmission of river blindness in six endemic countries in the Americas: Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Guatemala, Mexico and Venezuela. OEPA is a partnership consisting of the six endemic countries, the Pan American Health Organization , the private sector , donor countries, and nongovernmental development organizations . WHO recommends treating onchocerciasis with ivermectin at least once yearly for 10 to 15 years. Where O. volvulus co-exists with Loa loa, treatment strategies may need to be adjusted. Loa loa is a parasitic filarial worm that is endemic in Angola, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Congo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Nigeria, and South Sudan. Treatment of individuals with high levels of L. loa in the blood can sometimes result in severe adverse events. Affected countries, should follow the Mectizan Expert Committee /APOC recommendations for the prevention and management of severe adverse events.
To achieve the elimination for onchocerciasis, an ambitious research agenda will be needed to support programme progress. Specific research needs include:
WHO provides administrative, technical and operational research support to regions where onchocerciasis is transmitted.
The WHO Road map for neglected tropical diseases 2021–2030 identified onchocerciasis as one of the diseases targeted for elimination. The Road map set ambitious targets to be reached by 2030, which are to eliminate the need for MDA of ivermectin in at least 1 focus in 34 countries, in more than 50% of the population in at least 16 countries, and in the entire endemic population in at least 12 countries.
The Onchocerciasis Technical Advisory Subgroup setup by WHO in 2017 is providing guidance and oversight for operational research to identify endemic areas that require MDA. The NTD Diagnostic Technical Advisory Group identified development of new diagnostic tools for onchocerciasis as a specific priority. With the shift from control to elimination, large areas in Africa require mapping to assess whether transmission is active and treatment required. A sampling strategy named “onchocerciasis elimination mapping” has been developed to help countries conduct those assessments and start treatment where needed. Related
News
Fact sheets
Feature stories

========================================
one-health
========================================
One Health is an integrated, unifying approach to balance and optimize the health of people, animals and ecosystems. It uses the close, interdependent links among these fields to create new surveillance and disease control methods.
For example, the way land is used can impact the number of malaria cases. Weather patterns and human-built water controls can affect diseases like dengue. Trade in live, wild animals can increase the likelihood of infectious diseases jumping over to people .
The COVID-19 pandemic put a spotlight on the need for a global framework for improved surveillance and a more holistic, integrated system. Gaps in One Health knowledge, prevention and integrated approaches were seen as key drivers of the pandemic. By addressing the linkages between human, animal and environmental health, One Health is seen as a transformative approach to improved global health. One Health applies to a range of issues, include: According to the World Bank, the expected benefit of One Health to the global community was estimated in 2022 to be at least US$ 37 billion per year. The estimated annual need for expenditure on prevention is less than 10% of these benefits.
Since 2003, the world has seen over 15 million human deaths and US$ 4 trillion in economic losses due to disease and pandemics, as well as immense losses from food and water safety hazards, which are One Health related health threats. The emergence of the SARS-CoV-2 virus that caused COVID-19 has underlined the need to strengthen the One Health approach, with a greater emphasis on connections to animal health and the environment . Attempting to save money by neglecting environmental protection, emergency preparedness, health systems, water and sanitation infrastructure, and social safety nets has proven to be a false economy, and the bill is now being paid many times over.
We now have an unprecedented opportunity to strengthen collaboration and policies across these many areas and reduce the risk of future pandemics and epidemics while also addressing the ongoing burden of endemic and non-communicable diseases.
Surveillance that monitors risks and helps identify patterns across these many areas is needed. In addition, new research should integrate the impact of these different fields, particularly on the drivers that lead to crises. Challenges
To implement One Health, major structural changes are required to integrate the human, animal and environmental health fields and support multi-sectoral communication, collaboration, coordination, and capacity strengthening.
Critical gaps in One Health implementation include:
WHO is integrating One Health across its units and offices, providing strategic advice relating to policy, and conducting training at the local, national and regional levels. The goal is stronger programmes that are led and owned by countries. WHO is a member of the One Health Quadripartite with the Food and Agriculture Organization, the World Organisation for Animal Health and the United Nations Environment Programme. Together, they have developed a One Health Joint Plan of Action that includes a set of activities that the 4 organizations can do together, including working with political leaders to establish the needed infrastructure and funding.
WHO is the secretariat for the One Health High-Level Expert Panel , which provides scientific advice to the Quadripartite partners on One Health priority setting, policies and strategies. This includes recommendations on good practice guidelines, a model One Health Surveillance System, a comprehensive list of upstream drivers of zoonotic disease spillover and recommendations to mitigate these risks. Related
News

========================================
opioid-overdose
========================================
The term “opioids” includes compounds that are extracted from the poppy plant as well as semisynthetic and synthetic compounds with similar properties that can interact with opioid receptors in the brain. Opioids have analgesic and sedative effects, and such medicines as morphine, codeine and fentanyl are commonly used for the management of pain. Opioid medicines methadone and buprenorphine are used for maintenance treatment of opioid dependence. After intake, opioids can cause euphoria, which is one of the main reasons why they are taken for non-medical reasons. Opioids include heroin, morphine, codeine, fentanyl, methadone, tramadol, and other similar substances. Due to their pharmacological effects, they can cause difficulties with breathing, and opioid overdose can lead to death.
Their regular non-medical use, prolonged use, misuse and use without medical supervision can lead to opioid dependence and other health problems. Opioid dependence is a disorder of regulation of opioid use arising from repeated or continuous use of opioids. The characteristic feature of dependence is a strong internal drive to use opioids, which manifests itself by impaired ability to control use, increasing priority given to use over other activities and persistence of use despite harm or negative consequences. Physiological features of dependence may also be present, including increased tolerance to the effects of opioids, withdrawal symptoms following cessation or reduction in use, or repeated use of opioids or pharmacologically similar substances to prevent or alleviate withdrawal symptoms (1).
Worldwide, about 296 million people used drugs at least once in 2021. Among them, about 60 million people used opioids. About 39.5 million people lived with drug use disorders in 2021(2). Most people dependent on opioids used illicitly cultivated and manufactured heroin, but the proportion of those using prescription opioids is growing.
Opioid use can lead to death due to the effects of opioids on the part of the brain which regulates breathing. An opioid overdose can be identified by a combination of three signs and symptoms:
Worldwide, about 600 000 deaths were attributable to drug use in 2019. Close to 80% of these deaths are related to opioids, with about 25% of those deaths caused by opioid overdose. According to WHO estimates, approximately 125 000 people died of opioid overdose in 2019. Opioid overdoses that do not lead to death are several times more common than fatal overdoses.
The number of opioid overdoses has increased in recent years in several countries, in part due to the increased availability of opioids used in the management of chronic pain, and also due to increasing use of highly potent opioids appearing on the illicit drug market. In the United States of America the number of people dying from drug overdose amounted to 70 630 in 2019, and approximately half of these deaths involved synthetic opioids. From 2013 to 2019, the age-adjusted synthetic opioid death rates in the United States increased by 1040% (3). During the COVID-19 pandemic, a further substantial increase in drug overdose deaths was reported in the USA, primarily driven by rapid increases in overdose deaths involving synthetic opioids (4).
Fentanyl is a potent synthetic opioid that is used as a pain reliever and as an anaesthetic. It is approximately 50–100 times more potent than morphine. Fentanyl in various formulations is on the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines. However, fentanyl and its chemically-similar analogues have been associated with a spike in deaths from opioid overdose. There is evidence that drug dealers may be adding fentanyl to increase the potency of their products and selling fentanyl as counterfeit tablets, created to look like authentic prescription medications. Therefore, many users who test positive for fentanyl and its analogues do not realize that they took the substance.
There are a number of risk factors for opioid overdose. These include: Males, people of older age and people with low socio-economic status are at higher risk of opioid overdose than women, people of young age groups and people with higher socio-economic status.
Death following opioid overdose is preventable if the person receives basic life support and the timely administration of the drug naloxone. Naloxone is an antidote to opioids that will reverse the effects of an opioid overdose if administered in time. Naloxone has virtually no effect in people who have not taken opioids.
Access to naloxone is generally limited to health professionals. In many countries there is still limited availability of naloxone even in medical settings, including in ambulances. On the other hand, some countries have already made naloxone available in pharmacies without prescription. Several countries have introduced naloxone as over-the-counter medication and have also started proactive dissemination in communities.
In recent years, a number of programmes around the world have shown that providing naloxone to people likely to witness an opioid overdose, in combination with training on the use of naloxone and on the resuscitation of people following an opioid overdose, could substantially reduce the number of deaths resulting from opioid overdose. This is particularly relevant for people with opioid use disorders and leaving prison, as they have very high rates of opioid overdose during the first four weeks after release. People who are most likely to witness an opioid overdose are:
Beyond approaches to reducing drug use in general in the community, there are specific measures to prevent opioid overdose. These include:
The gap between recommendations and practice is significant. Only half of countries provide access to effective treatment options for opioid dependence and less than 10% of people worldwide in need of such treatment are receiving it (5).
WHO supports countries in their efforts to ensure rational use of opioids and their optimal availability for medical purposes and minimization of their misuse and non-medical use. Following the recommendation of WHO’s Expert Committee on Drug Dependence (6), a number of synthetic opioids, including fentanyl analogues, have been placed under international control, which means rigorous regulation for their availability.
WHO continues to monitor several fentanyl analogues through its surveillance system for new psychoactive substances, alerting countries to the potential dangers associated with these substances. Collection of such data is important as information about the patterns of use, misuse and non-medical use of opioids is very limited.
WHO also supports countries in monitoring trends in drug use and related harm, to better understand the scale of opioid dependence and opioid overdose.
WHO recommends that naloxone be made available to people likely to witness an opioid overdose, as well as training in the management of opioid overdose. In suspected opioid overdose, first responders should focus on airway management, assisting ventilation and administering naloxone. After successful resuscitation following the administration of naloxone, the level of consciousness and breathing of the affected person should be closely observed until full recovery has been achieved.
WHO recommends the use of a range of treatment options for opioid dependence. These include opioid agonist maintenance treatment , which has the strongest evidence of effectiveness and cost-effectiveness, as well as psychosocial treatment and support, and pharmacological treatment with opioid antagonists . WHO supports countries in improving the coverage and quality of treatment programmes for opioid dependence and introducing them where they do not already exist.
WHO also issues normative guidance to promote the appropriate use of opioids for pain and palliative care. Appropriate use and regulation of opioid analgesics ensures that they are available where needed whilst preventing their diversion and harm related to misuse.
In 2016, under the framework of the WHO/UNODC Programme on Drug Dependence Treatment and Care, the “Stop Overdose Safely ” Initiative was launched, to provide training on recognizing the risk of overdose and providing emergency care in the event of an overdose. As part of this Initiative, a multi-site study on community management of opioid overdose was implemented in Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and Ukraine in 2019-2020. About 40 000 kits of naloxone were distributed, more than 14 000 people were trained as part of the project and around 90% of those participants who witnessed an overdose reported using naloxone. In almost all instances, it was recorded that the person with overdose survived. Evaluation of the project showed that it was widely accepted by stakeholders, ranging from people who use drugs through to health and law enforcement officials (7).
References
WHO . International Classification of Diseases for Mortality and Morbidity Statistics. Eleventh Revision.
UNODC . World Drug Report 2023. Available at: https://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/data-and-analysis/world-drug-report-2023.html
Trends and Geographic Patterns and Synthetic Opioid Overdose Deaths – United States, 2013-2019. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, Vol. 70, No 6. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/70/wr/mm7006a4.htm?s_cid=mm7006a4_w
CDC Emergency Preparedness and Response: Increase in Fatal Drug Overdoses Across the United States Driven by Synthetic Opioids Before and During the COVID-19 Pandemic, 17 December 2020. Degenhardt L, Glantz M, Evans-Lacko S, et al. . Estimating treatment coverage for people with substance use disorders: an analysis of data from the World Mental Health Surveys. World Psychiatry. 2017;16(3):299-307. doi:10.1002/wps.2045 WHO Expert Committee on Drug Dependence: forty-third report . WHO, 2021. Available at: https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240023024 UNODC-WHO Stop-Overdose-Safely project implementation in Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Ukraine: summary report. WHO and UNODC, 2021. Available at: https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/340497
Related
UNODC-WHO Stop-Overdose-Safely ‎ project implementation in Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Ukraine: summary report
WHO-UNODC Stop Overdose Safely initiative
WHO Guidelines “Community management of opioid overdose”
The public health dimension of the world drug problem: how WHO works to prevent drug misuse, reduce harm and improve safe access to medicine
International Standards for the Treatment of Drug Use Disorders
WHO Technical Report Series 1018
Drugs

========================================
oral-health
========================================
Most oral health conditions are largely preventable and can be treated in their early stages. Most cases are dental caries , periodontal diseases, tooth loss and oral cancers. Other oral conditions of public health importance are orofacial clefts, noma and oro-dental trauma.
Prevalence of the main oral diseases continues to increase globally with growing urbanization and changes in living conditions. This is primarily due to inadequate exposure to fluoride , availability and affordability of food with high sugar content and poor access to oral health care services in the community. Marketing of food and beverages high in sugar, as well as tobacco and alcohol, have led to a growing consumption of products that contribute to oral health conditions and other NCDs.
Dental caries results when plaque forms on the surface of a tooth and converts the free sugars (all sugars added to foods by the manufacturer, cook or consumer, plus sugars naturally present in honey, syrups and fruit juices) contained in foods and drinks into acids that destroy the tooth over time. A continued high intake of free sugars, inadequate exposure to fluoride and a lack of removal of plaque by toothbrushing can lead to caries, pain and sometimes tooth loss and infection.
Periodontal disease affects the tissues that both surround and support the teeth. The disease is characterized by bleeding or swollen gums , pain and sometimes bad breath. In its more severe form, the gum can come away from the tooth and supporting bone, causing teeth to become loose and sometimes fall out. Severe periodontal diseases are estimated to affect more than 1 billion cases worldwide. The main risk factors for periodontal disease are poor oral hygiene and tobacco use.
Losing teeth is generally the end point of a lifelong history of oral disease, mainly advanced dental caries and severe periodontal disease, but can also be due to trauma and other causes. The estimated global average prevalence of complete tooth loss is almost 7% among people aged 20 years or older. For people aged 60 years or older, a much higher global prevalence of 23% has been estimated. Losing teeth can be psychologically traumatic, socially damaging and functionally limiting.
Oral cancer includes cancers of the lip, other parts of the mouth and the oropharynx and combined rank as the 13th most common cancer worldwide. The global incidence of cancers of the lip and oral cavity is estimated to be 389 846 new cases and 188 438 deaths in 2022 (1). Oral cancer is more common in men and in older people, more deadly in men compared to women and it varies strongly by socio-economic circumstances.
Tobacco, alcohol and areca nut use are among the leading causes of oral cancer. In North America and Europe, human papillomavirus infections are responsible for a growing percentage of oral cancers among young people.
Oro-dental trauma results from injury to the teeth, mouth and oral cavity. Latest estimates show that 1 billion people are affected, with a prevalence of around 20% for children up to 12 years old. Oro-dental trauma can be caused by oral factors such as lack of alignment of teeth and environmental factors . Treatment is costly and lengthy and sometimes can even lead to tooth loss, resulting in complications for facial and psychological development and quality of life.
Noma is a severe gangrenous disease of the mouth and the face. It mostly affects children aged 2–6 years suffering from malnutrition, affected by infectious disease, living in extreme poverty with poor oral hygiene or with weakened immune systems.
Noma is mostly found in sub-Saharan Africa, although cases have also been reported in Latin America and Asia. Noma starts as a soft tissue lesion of the gums. It then develops into an acute necrotizing gingivitis that progresses rapidly, destroying the soft tissues and further progressing to involve the hard tissues and skin of the face.
According to latest estimates there are 140 000 new cases of noma annually. Without treatment, noma is fatal in 90% of cases. Survivors suffer from severe facial disfigurement, have difficulty speaking and eating, endure social stigma, and require complex surgery and rehabilitation. Where noma is detected at an early stage, its progression can be rapidly halted through basic hygiene, antibiotics and improved nutrition.
Orofacial clefts, the most common of craniofacial birth defects, have a global prevalence of between 1 in 1000–1500 births, with wide variation in different studies and populations (2). Genetic predisposition is a major cause. However, poor maternal nutrition, tobacco consumption, alcohol and obesity during pregnancy also play a role. In low-income settings, there is a high mortality rate in the neonatal period. If lip and palate clefts are properly treated by surgery, complete rehabilitation is possible.
Most oral diseases and conditions share modifiable risk factors such as tobacco use, alcohol consumption and an unhealthy diet high in free sugars that are common to other NCDs including cardiovascular disease, cancer, chronic respiratory disease and diabetes.
In addition, diabetes has been linked in a reciprocal way with the development and progression of periodontal disease. There is also a causal link between the high consumption of sugar and diabetes, obesity and dental caries. Oral diseases disproportionately affect the poor and socially disadvantaged members of society. There is a very strong and consistent association between socioeconomic status and the prevalence and severity of oral diseases. This association exists from early childhood to older age and across populations in high-, middle- and low-income countries.
The burden of oral diseases and other noncommunicable diseases can be reduced through public health interventions by addressing common risk factors.
These include:
Adequate exposure to fluoride is an essential factor in the prevention of dental caries.
Twice-daily tooth brushing with fluoride-containing toothpaste should be encouraged.
Unequal distribution of oral health professionals and a lack of appropriate health facilities to meet population needs in most countries means that access to primary oral health services is often low. Out-of-pocket costs for oral health care can be major barriers to accessing care. Paying for necessary oral health care is among the leading reasons for catastrophic health expenditures, resulting in an increased risk of impoverishment and economic hardship. The World Health Assembly approved a Resolution on oral health in 2021 at the Seventy-fourth World Health Assembly. The Resolution recommends a shift from the traditional curative approach towards a preventive approach that includes promotion of oral health within the family, schools and workplaces, and includes timely, comprehensive and inclusive care within the primary health-care system. The Resolution affirms that oral health should be firmly embedded within the NCD agenda and that oral health-care interventions should be included in national universal health coverage benefit packages.
In response to the mandate outlined in the resolution, the Secretariat developed the Global strategy on oral health, adopted in May 2022 , and included the Global oral health action plan 2023‒2030 in the report on NCDs, noted by the Seventy-sixth World Health Assembly in 2023 . The GOHAP includes a range of actions for Member States, the WHO Secretariat, international partners, civil society organizations and the private sector.
In 2024, as an outcome of the first ever WHO Global Oral Health Meeting that took place 26–29 November in Bangkok, Thailand, the Bangkok Declaration – No Health Without Oral Health was adopted. This Declaration advocates for elevating oral diseases as a global public health priority. The Bangkok Declaration reiterates Member States' commitment to the landmark 2021 resolution on oral health, which advances the prevention and control of oral diseases as part of the NCD, UHC and environmental agendas. It emphasizes the need to strengthen health systems through primary health care approaches, ensuring that environmental sustainability and climate resilience are central components.
References
1. Ferlay J, Ervik M, Lam F, Laversanne M, Colombet M, Mery L, Piñeros M, Znaor A, Soerjomataram I, Bray F . Global Cancer Observatory: Cancer Today. Lyon, France: International Agency for Research on Cancer. Available from: https://gco.iarc.who.int/today
2. Salari N, Darvishi N, Heydari M, Bokaee S, Darvishi F, Mohammadi M. Global prevalence of cleft palate, cleft lip and cleft palate and lip: A comprehensive systematic review and meta-analysis. J Stomatol Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2021;S2468-7855(21)00118X. doi:10.1016/j.jormas.2021.05.008. Related
News
Fact sheets

========================================
oropouche-virus-disease
========================================
Oropouche virus disease is caused by the Oropouche virus that can cause fever, headache, joint pain, muscle pain, chills, nausea, vomiting and rash. Most people recover on their own, but the disease can cause severe symptoms in some patients.
OROV is a segmented single-stranded RNA virus belonging to the family Peribunyaviridae, genus Orthobunyavirus, which was first identified in 1955 in Vega de Oropouche, Trinidad and Tobago (1). The virus is transmitted to people through the bite of an infected insect, usually biting midges but also possibly by mosquitoes. It is thus referred to as an arthropod-borne virus . Prior to late 2023, reported cases of Oropouche virus disease were limited to South America, mostly near the Amazon rainforest, and the Caribbean. However, since December 2023, cases have been detected in other areas and have become more severe. In 2024, outbreaks have been documented outbreaks in nonendemic areas, two fatal cases with confirmed infection, and the possibility of mothers transmitting the disease to their babies while pregnant.
Oropouche virus disease was the second most common arboviral disease in South America before the emergence of chikungunya and Zika viruses in 2013 and 2015. Prior to late 2023, Oropouche virus disease was reported in Brazil, Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Haiti, Panama, Peru, Trinidad and Tobago, French Guiana and Venezuela; most cases were reported near the Amazon rainforest area. However, since December 2023, there has been an increase in the number of cases reported, including in areas where transmission had not been previously documented. In 2024, locally transmitted Oropouche virus disease was reported in seven countries in Latin America and the Caribbean: Brazil, Bolivia, Colombia, Cuba, Guyana, Peru and the Dominican Republic . Additionally, Oropouche virus disease cases were reported among travellers returning from countries with local transmission to the United States, Canada, Spain, Italy and Germany .
The Oropouche virus is primarily transmitted to humans through the bite of Culicoides paraensis midges. Culex quinquefasciatus, Coquillettidia venezuelensis and Aedes serratus mosquitoes can also act as possible vectors (8). The virus is believed to circulate in both a sylvatic cycle in forested areas, and in an urban epidemic cycle between insects and people. In the sylvatic cycle, non-human primates, sloths and perhaps birds serve as vertebrate hosts, although a definitive arthropod vector has not been identified. Further studies are underway to better understand the insect vectors and transmission cycles in the current outbreaks. Previously, there had been no confirmed reports of human-to-human transmission. However, there were reports in Brazil in 2024 of possible fetal infection with Oropouche virus, transmitted from mothers infected during pregnancy.
The incubation period of the Oropouche virus is typically 3 to 10 days. Symptoms of disease include fever, headache, joint pain , muscle pain , chills, nausea, vomiting and rash. Most cases recover completely within 7 days after the onset of symptoms. However, recovery can take weeks in some patients, and severe complications like aseptic meningitis may occasionally occur. Though deaths from OROV infection were not previously described, in 2024 there were two reports of deaths in previously healthy young adults with Oropouche virus infection.
Given the similar clinical presentation to other arboviruses like dengue and chikungunya, Oropouche virus disease is often unrecognized or misdiagnosed. Diagnosis of Oropouche virus disease is made by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction and real-time RT-PCR (9). Serologic assays can be used to aid diagnosis; however, they should be conducted by highly trained personnel and in laboratories equipped with appropriate containment facilities. There are no available commercial diagnostic or rapid tests based on antigens or immunoassays available.
There is no specific treatment available for Oropouche virus disease. Treatment is primarily supportive and focuses on relieving symptoms.
The understanding of complications from Oropouche virus disease is limited. Occasionally, aseptic meningitis may occur. Recently, there were reports from Brazil describing five cases of possible Oropouche virus transmission during pregnancy as well as four cases of newborns with microcephaly detected via retrospective investigations. Despite the detection of viral RNA by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction testing of fetal tissues, it cannot be concluded that OROV infection was the cause of fetal deaths, and investigations are still ongoing. There is no vaccine available to prevent Oropouche virus disease. Vector control and personal protective measures are key in reducing the spread of the virus. Standard bed nets are less effective against the biting midge, as these insects are small and can pass through the netting. In contrast, fine mesh bed nets and chemical insecticides used as residual spray on internal and external walls of infested premises have been shown to be effective. Personal protective measures, such as wearing protective clothing and using insect repellents containing DEET, IR3535 or icaridin, are recommended to minimize the risk of infection. The Pan American Health Organization – the World Health Organization Regional Office for the Americas – in collaboration with WHO Member States, is actively monitoring the epidemiological situation of Oropouche virus disease.
PAHO conducted a rapid risk assessment which indicated a high regional risk due to the increasing number of cases, their expansion into new areas, recently reported fatal cases, and the possible risk of vertical transmission (10). WHO Member States have been alerted by PAHO and have been provided recommendation to in terms of diagnosis and clinical management, laboratory diagnosis and surveillance, and prevention and control of Oropouche virus disease. Learn more about the PAHO response. References
Related
Oropouche virus disease - Region of the AmericasGlobal Arbovirus Initiative News
Fact sheets

========================================
osteoarthritis
========================================
Osteoarthritis is a degenerative joint condition. It causes pain, swelling and stiffness, affecting a person’s ability to move freely. Osteoarthritis affects the entire joint, including the tissues around it. It is most common in the knees, hips, spine and hands.
Many factors can contribute to developing osteoarthritis. Some include a history of joint injury or overuse, older age and being overweight. It affects women more than men.
Exercise and healthy eating to build strong muscles and keep a healthy weight can reduce symptoms. Surgery to replace joints is used in severe cases to reduce pain and regain mobility.
Once pain and loss of movement function become chronic, people with osteoarthritis often experience restrictions in participating in meaningful activities, decreased well-being, and psychological distress.
Osteoarthritis is one of the significant contributors to years lived with disability among the musculoskeletal conditions. As osteoarthritis is more prevalent in older people , global prevalence is expected to increase with the ageing of populations. The typical onset is in the late 40s to mid-50s, although osteoarthritis may also affect younger people, including athletes and people who sustain joint injury or trauma. About 60% of people living with osteoarthritis are women. Symptoms of osteoarthritis include pain, swelling, stiffness and trouble moving the affected joint. As a consequence of reduced movement, muscles often lose strength and people become less able to perform physical activities.
Osteoarthritis can affect any joint but is most common in the knees, hips, spine and small joints in the hands. Muscles and tissue around the joint are often affected. Symptoms can develop slowly or start quickly after an injury or strain. Osteoarthritis is chronic and often progressive, so changes happen gradually over time. In severe cases, it can make the joint unusable and cause long-term pain. Some people feel pain even when resting.
Being less physically active can lead to other conditions, including cardiovascular diseases, obesity and diabetes.
Osteoarthritis can greatly reduce the quality of life. It makes movement painful and difficult, which can stop people from participating in home, work or social activities. This can lead to mental health impacts, trouble sleeping and problems in relationships. Several risk factors are known to increase the risk of developing osteoarthritis:
Several key prevention strategies have been proposed to prevent osteoarthritis and control the disease progression. In particular, reducing overuse of joints , and promoting healthy lifestyles play an important role.
Management of osteoarthritis often involves different health workers, who contribute to a rehabilitative strategy tailored to a person’s needs and preferences. Being diagnosed early and following a treatment plan is the best way to slow the disease and optimize function.
Exercise can strengthen the affected muscles and help mobility. Other therapeutic approaches can help the joint to move properly and allow people to continue their daily activities.
Braces and other assistive technologies can help people to stay independent when movement becomes more difficult.
Medicines like non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may be prescribed to control pain. Joint replacement surgery can reduce pain, restore movement and improve quality of life for most people with severely affected joints. These surgeries are most commonly performed at the hip and knee.
It is important to stay at a healthy weight. Education and counselling are important to help people manage their symptoms and work-related tasks. Most guidelines suggest that opioid analgesics, glucosamine and visco-supplementation therapies are not effective for osteoarthritis and there is insufficient evidence to suggest stem cell therapy is beneficial.
Self-care is an important part of managing osteoarthritis. Education and support can help people learn to cope with the physical and mental effects of osteoarthritis. People with osteoarthritis should speak to a health worker to build a tailored care plan.
Staying active and maintaining a healthy weight can help reduce symptoms and the risk of their progression.
WHO is taking action to extend access to care for people with osteoarthritis in different ways:
WHO Rehabilitation 2030 Initiative: The Package of Interventions for Rehabilitation provides information on essential interventions for rehabilitation , and human and material resources for 20 health conditions, including osteoarthritis.
UN Decade of Healthy Ageing:
WHO recommends a reorientation of health and care systems to promote healthy ageing and address the diverse needs of older persons. The Integrated Care for Older People approach promotes the person-centred assessment of the older person to guide the design of personalized, health and social care, including long-term care interventions. Specific recommendations are provided to prevent the loss of locomotor and psychological capacity because of pain.
References
1. GBD 2019: Global burden of 369 diseases and injuries in 204 countries and territories, 1990–2019: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019. https://vizhub.healthdata.org/gbd-results/.
2. Long H, Liu Q, Yin H, Diao N, Zhang Y, Lin J et al. Prevalence trends of site-specific osteoarthritis from 1990 to 2019: Findings from the global burden of disease study 2019. Arthritis Rheumatol 2022; 74(7): 1172-1183.
Related
Fact sheets

========================================
palliative-care
========================================
Addressing suffering involves taking care of issues beyond physical symptoms. Palliative care uses a team approach to support patients and their caregivers. This includes addressing practical needs and providing bereavement counselling. It offers a support system to help patients live as actively as possible until death.
Palliative care is explicitly recognized under the human right to health. It should be provided through person-centered and integrated health services that pay special attention to the specific needs and preferences of individuals. Palliative care is required for a wide range of diseases. The majority of adults in need of palliative care have chronic diseases such as cardiovascular diseases , cancer , chronic respiratory diseases , AIDS and diabetes . Many other conditions may require palliative care, including kidney failure, chronic liver disease, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson’s disease, rheumatoid arthritis, neurological disease, dementia, congenital anomalies and drug-resistant tuberculosis.
Pain and difficulty in breathing are two of the most frequent and serious symptoms experienced by patients in need of palliative care. For example, 80% of patients with AIDS or cancer, and 67% of patients with cardiovascular disease or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease will experience moderate to severe pain at the end of their lives. Opioids are essential for managing pain. Opioids can also alleviate other common distressing physical symptoms including breathlessness. Controlling such symptoms at an early stage is an ethical duty to relieve suffering and to respect a person’s dignity.
Each year an estimated 56.8 million people are in need of palliative care, most of whom live in low- and middle-income countries. For children, 98% of those needing palliative care live in low- and middle-income countries with almost half of them living in Africa. Worldwide, a number of significant barriers must be overcome to address the unmet need for palliative care: According to a WHO survey relating to noncommunicable diseases conducted among 194 Member States in 2019: funding for palliative care was available in 68% of countries and only 40% of countries reported that the services reached at least half of patients in need (1). The International Narcotics Control Board found that in 2018, 79 per cent of the world’s population, mainly people in low- and middle-income countries, consumed only 13 per cent of the total amount of morphine used for the management of pain and suffering, or 1 per cent of the 388 tons of morphine manufactured worldwide. Although that was an improvement over 2014, when 80 per cent of the world’s population consumed only 9.5 per cent of the morphine used for the management of pain and suffering, the disparity in the consumption of narcotic drugs for palliative care between low- and middle-income countries and high-income countries continues to be a matter of concern (2).
Other barriers to palliative care include:
National health systems are responsible for including palliative care in the continuum of care for people with chronic and life-threatening conditions, linking it to prevention, early detection and treatment programmes. This includes, as a minimum, the following components:
Palliative care is most effective when considered early in the course of the illness. Early palliative care not only improves quality of life for patients but also reduces unnecessary hospitalizations and use of health-care services.
Palliative care needs to be provided in accordance with the principles of universal health coverage. All people, irrespective of income, disease type or age, should have access to a nationally- determined set of basic health services, including palliative care. Financial and social protection systems need to take into account the human right to palliative care for poor and marginalized population groups.
As part of multidisciplinary teams, the nursing workforce should be trained in palliativecare skills, especially those who work with patients with serious illness.
Specialist palliative care is one component of palliative care service delivery. But a sustainable, quality and accessible palliative care system needs to be integrated into primary health care, community and home-based care, as well as supporting care providers such as family and community volunteers. Providing palliative care should be considered an ethical duty for health professionals. Palliative care medicines, including those for pain relief, are included in WHO Essential Medicines List and the WHO Essential Medicines List for Children. Palliative care is recognized in key global mandates and strategies on universal health coverage, noncommunicable diseases, and people-centred and integrated health services. WHO Guidelines for the pharmacological and radiotherapeutic management of cancer pain in adults and adolescents were released in 2019 (3).
In 2014, the first ever global resolution on palliative care, World Health Assembly resolution WHA67.19, called upon WHO and Member States to improve access to palliative care as a core component of health systems, with an emphasis on primary health care and community/home-based care. WHO’s work to strengthen palliative care focuses on the following areas:
(1) Assessing national capacity for the prevention and control of noncommunicable diseases: report of the 2019 global survey. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020. Licence: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO. (2) The Report of the International Narcotics Control Board for 2019 https://www.incb.org/documents/Narcotic-Drugs/Technical-Publications/2019/Narcotic_Drugs_Technical_Publication_2019_web.pdf (3) WHO Guidelines for the pharmacological and radiotherapeutic management of cancer pain in adults and adolescents. https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/who-guidelines-for-the-pharmacological-and-radiotherapeutic-management-of-cancer-pain-in-adults-and-adolescents
Related
Planning and Implementing palliative care services: a guide for programme managers.Integrating palliative care and symptom relief into primary health care. A WHO guide for planners, implementers and managers.Integrating palliative care and symptom relief into paediatrics. A WHO guide for planners, implementers and managers.Integrating palliative care and symptom relief into the response to humanitarian emergencies and crises. A WHO guide for planners, implementers and managers. Documents

========================================
parkinson-disease
========================================
Parkinson disease (PD) is a brain condition that causes problems with movement, mental health, sleep, pain and other health issues. PD gets worse over time. There is no cure, but therapies and medicines can reduce symptoms. Common symptoms include tremors, painful muscle contractions and difficulty speaking.
Parkinson disease results in high rates of disability and the need for care. Many people with PD also develop dementia.
The disease usually occurs in older people, but younger people can also be affected. Men are affected more often than women. The cause of PD is unknown but people with a family history of the disease have a higher risk. Exposure to air pollution, pesticides and solvents may increase risk. Symptoms of Parkinson disease get worse over time. They can greatly reduce well-being and quality of life.
PD causes motors symptoms including:
Non-motor symptoms:
Involuntary movements and painful muscle contractions can cause problems speaking and moving. These symptoms lead to high rates of disability and the need for care. Many people with PD also develop dementia during the course of their disease.
While PD is the most common movement disorder, other movement disorders exist such as multiple system atrophy, progressive supranuclear palsy, chorea, ataxia and dystonia. Some movement disorders have similar symptoms to PD such as tremor, slow movement and rigidity. All movement disorders share the same challenges as PD regarding diagnostic and treatment gaps and access to medication, particularly in low- and middle-income countries .
PD is a clinical diagnosis that not only can be made by neurologists but also by trained non-specialist healthcare workers. Assessment and management of PD by trained non-specialized healthcare workers in primary care is particularly important in areas where specialist neurological services are unavailable, such as in some LMIC.
The prevalence of PD has doubled in the past 25 years. Global estimates in 2019 showed over 8.5 million individuals with PD. Current estimates suggest that, in 2019, PD resulted in 5.8 million disability adjusted life years , an increase of 81% since 2000, and caused 329 000 deaths, an increase of over 100% since 2000.
There is no cure for Parkinson disease, but therapies including medicines, surgery and rehabilitation can reduce symptoms. Levodopa/carbidopa, a combination medicine that increases the amount of dopamine in the brain, is the most common medication for PD (1). Doctors may use other medicines such as anticholinergics to reduce involuntary muscle movement. Deep brain stimulation and other therapies can help the tremors and reduce the need for medicines. Rehabilitation including physiotherapy can offer relief for Parkinson disease and other degenerative neurologic disorders. Therapies include:
These therapies can help improve functioning and quality of life for people with PD. This can also reduce the strain on carers.
Many medications and surgical resources are not accessible, available or affordable everywhere, particularly low- and middle-income countries.
Informal carers spend many hours daily providing care for people living with PD. This can be overwhelming. Physical, emotional and financial pressures can cause great stress to families and carers, and support is required from the health, social, financial and legal systems. Useful support resources from other conditions can be drawn upon, such as WHO’s iSupport programme for dementia.
People with PD are often subject to stigma and discrimination, including unjust discrimination within the workplace and lack of opportunities to engage and participate in their communities.
People with PD require accessible health services for general healthcare needs like the rest of the population, including medicine access, promotive and preventive services and prompt diagnosis, treatment and care. A common barrier is created by healthcare providers’ inadequate knowledge and understanding of PD and myths that PD is a contagious illness or a normal part of aging.
In May 2022, the World Health Assembly endorsed the Intersectoral global action plan on epilepsy and other neurological disorders 2022–2031. The action plan will address the challenges and gaps in providing care and services for people with epilepsy and other neurological disorders such as PD that exist worldwide and ensure a comprehensive, coordinated response across sectors. This includes raising policy prioritization and strengthening governance, providing effective, timely and responsive diagnosis, treatment and care, implementing strategies for promotion and prevention, fostering research and innovation and strengthening information systems.
A WHO technical brief entitled Parkinson disease: a public health approach is available for policy-makers, health programme managers and planners, healthcare providers, researchers, people with PD, carers and other stakeholders. It outlines the important action areas for intervention in PD including global health policies focused on prevention and risk reduction, education and awareness and access to treatment and care at various levels of the health system.
Notes
Related
News
Fact sheets

========================================
patient-safety
========================================
Overview
“First, do no harm” is the most fundamental principle of any health care service. No one should be harmed in health care; however, there is compelling evidence of a huge burden of avoidable patient harm globally across the developed and developing health care systems. This has major human, moral, ethical and financial implications.
Patient safety is defined as “the absence of preventable harm to a patient and reduction of risk of unnecessary harm associated with health care to an acceptable minimum." Within the broader health system context, it is “a framework of organized activities that creates cultures, processes, procedures, behaviours, technologies and environments in health care that consistently and sustainably lower risks, reduce the occurrence of avoidable harm, make error less likely and reduce impact of harm when it does occur."
Medication errors. Medication-related harm affects 1 out of every 30 patients in health care, with more than a quarter of this harm regarded as severe or life threatening. Half of the avoidable harm in health care is related to medications (3).
Surgical errors. Over 300 million surgical procedures are performed each year worldwide (6). Despite awareness of adverse effects, surgical errors continue to occur at a high rate; 10% of preventable patient harm in health care was reported in surgical settings (2), with most of the resultant adverse events occurring pre- and post-surgery (7).
Health care-associated infections. With a global rate of 0.14% , health care-associated infections result in extended duration of hospital stays, long-standing disability, increased antimicrobial resistance, additional financial burden on patients, families and health systems, and avoidable deaths (8).
Sepsis. Sepsis is a serious condition that happens when the body’s immune system has an extreme response to an infection. The body’s reaction causes damage to its own tissues and organs. Of all sepsis cases managed in hospitals, 23.6% were found to be health care associated, and approximately 24.4% of affected patients lost their lives as a result (9).
Diagnostic errors. These occur in 5–20% of physician–patient encounters . According to doctor reviews, harmful diagnostic errors were found in a minimum of 0.7% of adult admissions (12). Most people will suffer a diagnostic error in their lifetime (13). Patient falls. Patient falls are the most frequent adverse events in hospitals (14). Their rate of occurrence ranges from 3 to 5 per 1000 bed-days, and more than one third of these incidents result in injury (15), thereby reducing clinical outcomes and increasing the financial burden on systems (16).
Venous thromboembolism. More simply known as blood clots, venous thromboembolism is a highly burdensome and preventable cause of patient harm, which contributes to one third of the complications attributed to hospitalization (17).
Pressure ulcers. Pressure ulcers are injuries to the skin or soft tissue. They develop from pressure to particular parts of the body over an extended period. If not promptly managed, they can have fatal complications. Pressure ulcers affect more than 1 in 10 adult patients admitted to hospitals (18) and, despite being highly preventable, they have a significant impact on the mental and physical health of individuals, and their quality of life. Unsafe transfusion practices. Unnecessary transfusions and unsafe transfusion practices expose patients to the risk of serious adverse transfusion reactions and transfusion-transmissible infections. Data on adverse transfusion reactions from a group of 62 countries show an average incidence of 12.2 serious reactions per 100 000 distributed blood components.
Patient misidentification. Failure to correctly identify patients can be a root cause of many problems and has serious effects on health care provision. It can lead to catastrophic adverse effects, such as wrong-site surgery. A report of the Joint Commission published in 2018 identified 409 sentinel events of patient identification out of 3326 incidents between 2014 and 2017 (19).
Unsafe injection practices. Each year, 16 billion injections are administered worldwide, and unsafe injection practices place patients and health and care workers at risk of infectious and non-infectious adverse events. Using mathematical modelling, a study estimated that, in a period of 10 years , 1.67 million hepatitis B virus infections, between 157 592 and 315 120 hepatitis C virus infections, and between 16 939 and 33 877 HIV infections were associated with unsafe injections (20). Patient harm in health care due to safety breaks is pervasive, problematic and can occur in all settings and at all levels of health care provision. There are multiple and interrelated factors that can lead to patient harm, and more than one factor is usually involved in any single patient safety incident:
Most of the mistakes that lead to harm do not occur as a result of the practices of one or a group of health and care workers but are rather due to system or process failures that lead these health and care workers to make mistakes.
Understanding the underlying causes of errors in medical care thus requires shifting from the traditional blaming approach to a more system-based thinking. In this, errors are attributed to poorly designed system structures and processes, and the human nature of all those working in health care facilities under a considerable amount of stress in complex and quickly changing environments is recognized. This is done without overlooking negligence or misbehaviour from those providing care that leads to substandard medical management. A safe health system is one that adopts all necessary measures to avoid and reduce harm through organized activities, including: Investing in patient safety positively impacts health outcomes, reduces costs related to patient harm, improves system efficiency, and helps in reassuring communities and restoring their trust in health care systems .
Recognizing patient safety as a global health priority, and as an essential component of strengthening health systems for moving towards universal health coverage, the Seventy-second World Health Assembly adopted resolution WHA72.6 on “Global action on patient safety” in May 2019. The resolution requested the Director-General to emphasize patient safety as a key strategic priority in WHO’s work across the universal health coverage agenda, endorsed the establishment of World Patient Safety Day to be observed annually on 17 September, and requested WHO’s Director-General to develop a global patient safety action plan with the involvement of WHO Member States, partners and other relevant stakeholders. The Global Patient Safety Action Plan 2021–2030 provides a framework for action for key stakeholders to join efforts and implement patient safety initiatives in a comprehensive manner. The goal is “to achieve the maximum possible reduction in avoidable harm due to unsafe health care globally”, envisioning “a world in which no one is harmed in health care, and every patient receives safe and respectful care, every time, everywhere”. Since 2019, World Patient Safety Day has been celebrated across the world annually on 17 September, calling for global solidarity and concerted action by all countries and international partners to improve patient safety. The global campaign, with its dedicated annual theme, is aimed at enhancing public awareness and global understanding of patient safety and mobilizing action by stakeholders to eliminate avoidable harm in health care and thereby improve patient safety. WHO has launched the Patient Safety Flagship as a transformative initiative to guide and support strategic action on patient safety at the global, regional and national levels. Its core work involves supporting the implementation of the Global Patient Safety Action Plan 2021–2030. References
1. Slawomirski L, Klazinga N. The economics of patient safety: from analysis to action. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; 2020 (http://www.oecd.org/health/health-systems/Economics-of-Patient-Safety-October-2020.pdf, accessed 6 September 2023).
2. Panagioti M, Khan K, Keers RN, Abuzour A, Phipps D, Kontopantelis E et al. Prevalence, severity, and nature of preventable patient harm across medical care settings: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ. 2019;366:l4185. doi:10.1136/bmj.l4185.
3. Hodkinson A, Tyler N, Ashcroft DM, Keers RN, Khan K, Phipps D et al. Preventable medication harm across health care settings: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Med. 2020;18(1):1–3.
4. Slawomirski L, Auraaen A, Klazinga N. The economics of patient safety in primary and ambulatory care: flying blind. OECD Health Working Papers No. 106. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; 2018 .
5. Slawomirski L, Auraaen A, Klazinga N. The economics of patient safety: strengthening a value-based approach to reducing patient harm at national level. OECD Health Working Papers No. 96. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co operation and Development; 2017 .
6. Meara, John G., Andrew JM Leather, Lars Hagander, Blake C. Alkire, Nivaldo Alonso, Emmanuel A. Ameh, et al. Global Surgery 2030: evidence and solutions for achieving health, welfare, and economic development. The lancet. 2015; 386: 569-624
7. Rodziewicz TL, Houseman B, Hipskind JE. Medical error reduction and prevention. Treasure Island, FL: StatPearls Publishing; 2023.
8. Raoofi S, Kan FP, Rafiei S, Hosseinipalangi Z, Mejareh ZN, Khani S et al. Global prevalence of nosocomial infection: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One. 2023;18(1):e0274248.
9. Markwart R, Saito H, Harder T, Tomczyk S, Cassini A, Fleischmann-Struzek C et al. Epidemiology and burden of sepsis acquired in hospitals and intensive care units: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Intensive Care Med. 2020;46(8):1536–51. doi:10.1007/s00134-020-06106-2. 10. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. Improving diagnosis in health care. Washington (DC): National Academies Press; 2015 .
11. Bergl PA, Nanchal RS, Singh H. Diagnostic error in the critically ill: defining the problem and exploring next steps to advance intensive care unit safety. Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2018;15(8):903–7.
12. Gunderson CG, Bilan VP, Holleck JL, Nickerson P, Cherry BM, Chui P et al. Prevalence of harmful diagnostic errors in hospitalised adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ Qual Saf. 2020;29(12):1008–18.
13. Singh H, Meyer AN, Thomas EJ. The frequency of diagnostic errors in outpatient care: estimations from three large observational studies involving US adult populations. BMJ Qual Saf. 2014;23(9):727–31. 14. LeLaurin JH, Shorr RI. Preventing falls in hospitalized patients: state of the science. Clin Geriatr Med. 2019;35(2):273–83.
15. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Falls. PSNet; 2019. .
16. Dykes PC, Curtin-Bowen M, Lipsitz S, Franz C, Adelman J, Adkison L et al. Cost of inpatient falls and cost-benefit analysis of implementation of an evidence-based fall prevention program. JAMA Health Forum. 2023;4(1):e225125. doi:10.1001/jamahealthforum.2022.5125. 17. Raskob GE, Angchaisuksiri P, Blanco AN, Buller H, Gallus A, Hunt BJ et al. Thrombosis: a major contributor to global disease burden. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2014;34(11):2363–71. doi:10.1161/ATVBAHA.114.304488.
18. Li Z, Lin F, Thalib L, Chaboyer W. Global prevalence and incidence of pressure injuries in hospitalised adult patients: A systematic review and meta-analysis. International journal of nursing studies. 2020 May 1;105:103546.
19. De Rezende HA, Melleiro MM, Shimoda GT. Interventions to reduce patient identification errors in the hospital setting: a systematic review protocol. JBI Evidence Synthesis. 2019;17(1):37–42.
20. Pèpin J, Chakra CN, Pèpin E, Nault V, Valiquette L. Evolution of the global burden of viral infections from unsafe medical injections, 2000–2010. PLoS One. 2014;9(6):e99677.
Related
News
Fact sheets
Events
More
Antimicrobial resistanceBlood safety and availabilityInfection prevention and controlRadiation safetyUniversal health coverage

========================================
pesticide-residues-in-food
========================================
There are more than 1000 pesticides used around the world to ensure food is not damaged or destroyed by pests. Each pesticide has different properties and toxicological effects.
Many of the older, less costly pesticides, such as dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane and lindane, can remain for years in soil and water. These chemicals have been banned by countries which signed the 2001 Stockholm Convention, an international treaty that aims to eliminate or restrict the production and use of persistent organic pollutants.
The toxicity of a pesticide depends on its function and other factors. For example, insecticides tend to be more toxic to humans than herbicides. The same chemical can have different effects at different doses, that is, the amount of chemical to which a person is exposed. Toxicity can also depend on the route by which the exposure occurs, such as by swallowing, inhaling or direct contact with the skin.
None of the pesticides currently authorized for use on food in international trade are genotoxic . Adverse effects from these pesticides occur only above a certain safe level of exposure. When people come into contact with large quantities of pesticide, the result may be acute poisoning or long-term health effects that may include cancer and adverse effects on reproduction.
Pesticides are among the leading causes of death by self-poisoning, particularly in low- and middle-income countries.
Since pesticides are intrinsically toxic and deliberately spread in the environment, their production, distribution and use call for strict regulation and control. Regular monitoring of residues in food and the environment is also required.
WHO has two objectives in relation to pesticides:
The population most at risk are those who are directly exposed to pesticides. This includes agricultural workers who apply pesticides and anyone else in the immediate area during, and shortly after, pesticides are spread.
The general population – those not in the area where pesticides are used – is exposed to significantly lower levels of pesticide residues through food and water.
Nobody should be exposed to unsafe amounts of pesticide.
People spreading pesticide on crops, in homes or in gardens should be adequately protected. People not directly involved in the spreading of pesticides should stay away from the area while spreading takes place, and for some time afterwards.
Food that is sold or donated should equally comply with pesticide regulations, in particular with maximum residue limits. People who use pesticides when growing their own food should follow instructions for use and protect themselves by wearing gloves and face masks as necessary.
Consumers can further limit their intake of pesticide residues by peeling or washing fruit and vegetables, which also reduces other foodborne hazards such as harmful bacteria.
The United Nations Population Division estimates that by the year 2050 there will be 9.7 billion people on Earth – around 30% more people than in 2017. Nearly all of this population growth will occur in developing countries.
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations estimates that in developing countries, 80% of the increase in food production needed to keep pace with population growth, is projected to come from either increases in yields and/or the number of times each year crops can be grown on the same land. Only 20% of extra food production is expected to result from an expansion of farming land.
Pesticides can prevent large crop losses and will therefore continue to play a role in agriculture. However, the effects of exposure to pesticides on humans and the environment are a continuing concern.
The use of pesticides to produce food, both to feed local populations and for export, should comply with good agricultural practices regardless of the economic status of a country. Farmers should limit the amount of pesticide used to the minimum necessary to protect their crops.
It is also possible, under certain circumstances, to produce food without the use of pesticides.
WHO, in collaboration with FAO, is responsible for assessing the risks to humans from pesticides, whether through direct exposure or residues in food, and for recommending adequate protection measures.
Risk assessments for pesticide residues in food are conducted by an independent, international expert scientific group, the Joint FAO/WHO Meeting on Pesticide Residues . These assessments are based on all data submitted for national registrations of pesticides worldwide, as well as all scientific studies published in peer-reviewed journals. After assessing the level of risk, JMPR establishes limits for safe intake to ensure that the amount of pesticide residue to which people are exposed through eating food over their lifetime will not result in adverse health effects.
These acceptable daily intakes are used by governments and international risk managers, such as the Codex Alimentarius Commission , to establish maximum residue limits for pesticides in food. Codex standards are the reference for international trade in food, meaning that consumers everywhere can be confident that the food they buy meets the agreed standards for safety and quality, no matter where it has been produced. Currently there are Codex standards for more than 100 different pesticides.
WHO and FAO have jointly developed the International Code of Conduct on Pesticide Management. The most recent edition of this voluntary framework was published in 2014. It guides government regulators, the private sector, civil society and other stakeholders on best practices in managing pesticides throughout their lifecycle, from production to disposal.
Related
Fact sheets

========================================
physical-activity
========================================
WHO defines physical activity as any bodily movement produced by skeletal muscles that requires energy expenditure. Physical activity refers to all movement including during leisure time, for transport to get to and from places, or as part of a person’s work or domestic activities. Both moderate- and vigorous-intensity physical activity improve health. Popular ways to be active include walking, cycling, wheeling, sports, active recreation and play, and can be done at any level of skill and for enjoyment by everybody. Physical activity is beneficial to health and well-being and conversely, physical inactivity increases risk for noncommunicable diseases and other poor health outcomes. Together, physical inactivity and sedentary behaviours are contributing to the rise in NCDs and placing a burden on healthcare systems. Improving levels of physical activity will benefit health and well-being and contribute to attainment of global NCD targets and a number of the Sustainable Development Goals. However, this will require increased commitments and investments by Member States; innovation and contributions from non-state actors; cross sector coordination and collaboration; and ongoing guidance and monitoring from WHO.
Physical inactivity is one of the leading risk factors for noncommunicable diseases mortality. People who are insufficiently active have a 20% to 30% increased risk of death compared to people who are sufficiently active. Regular physical activity is associated with:
Sedentary behaviour is any period of low-energy expenditure while awake such as sitting, reclining or lying. Lives are becoming increasingly sedentary through the use of motorized transport and the increased use of screens for work, education and recreation. Evidence shows higher amounts of sedentary behaviour are associated with the following poor health outcomes:
The WHO Global guidelines on physical activity and sedentary behaviour provide recommendations for children , adolescents, adults, older adults, pregnant and post-partum women, and people living with chronic conditions and disabilities. The recommendations detail the amount of physical activity required to offer significant health benefits and to reduce health risks. The guidelines highlight that any amount of physical activity is better than none; all physical activity counts; all age groups should limit the amount of time being sedentary; and muscle strengthening benefits everyone.
The WHO Guidelines on physical activity, sedentary behaviour and sleep for children under 5 years of age provide recommendations on the amount of time in a 24-hour day that young children, under 5 years of age, should spend being physically active or sleeping for their health and well-being, and the maximum recommended time these children should spend on screen-based sedentary activities or time restrained. An infographic summarizes the current WHO guidelines on physical activity and sedentary behaviour for all age groups. WHO develops guidelines through an arduous process of reviewing scientific evidence and expert consultations. Preparations are already underway for the next guidelines, anticipated for publication in 2030. WHO regularly monitors trends in physical inactivity. A recent study (1) found that nearly one third of the world’s adult population, 1.8 billion adults, are physically inactive. That is, they do not meet the global recommendations of at least 150 minutes of moderate-intensity physical activity per week. This is an increase of 5 percentage points between 2010 and 2022. If this trend continues, the proportion of adults not meeting recommended levels of physical activity is projected to rise to 35% by 2030.
Globally, there are notable age and gender differences in levels of physical inactivity. Many different factors can determine how active people are and the overall levels of physical activity in different population groups. These factors can be related to the individual or wider social, cultural, environmental and economic determinants that influence access and opportunities to be active in safe and enjoyable ways. The WHO Global action plan on physical activity provides policy recommendations for countries and communities to promote physical activity and ensure everyone has more opportunities to be regularly active. Examples of these recommendations include policies that ensure access to walking, cycling and non-motorized transport; that increase physical activity opportunities in schools, workplaces, childcare centres and in healthcare service delivery; and that increase accessibility and availability of community sports and public open spaces. Implementing effective policies to increase levels of physical activity requires a collective effort, coordinated across multiple government departments at all levels, including health, transport, education, employment, sport and recreation, and urban planning. It also demands national and local engagement from nongovernmental organizations, various sectors, stakeholders and disciplines to support the implementation of policies and solutions that are appropriate to a country’s cultural and social environment. Priority should be given to policy actions that address disparities in levels of physical activity, promoting, enabling and encouraging physical activity for all.
WHO supports countries and stakeholders to implement the recommended actions by:
WHO supports countries and stakeholders to implement the recommended actions by developing global policy guidance and guidelines, underpinned by latest evidence and consensus, to help countries develop appropriate policies, investment cases and financing mechanisms.
References
Related
News
Fact sheets

========================================
plague
========================================
Plague is a very severe disease in people, particularly in its septicaemic and pneumonic forms, with a case-fatality ratio of 30% to 100% if left untreated. The pneumonic form is invariably fatal unless treated early. It is especially contagious and can trigger severe epidemics through person-to-person contact via droplets in the air. Historically, plague was responsible for widespread pandemics with high mortality. It was known as the "Black Death" during the fourteenth century, causing more than 50 million deaths in Europe. Nowadays, plague is easily treated with antibiotics and the use of standard precautions to prevent acquiring infection. People infected with plague usually develop acute febrile disease with other non-specific systemic symptoms after an incubation period of one to seven days, such as sudden onset of fever, chills, head and body aches, and weakness, vomiting and nausea. There are two main forms of plague infection, depending on the route of infection: bubonic and pneumonic. As an animal disease, plague is found in all continents, except Oceania. There is a risk of human plague wherever the presence of plague natural foci and human population co-exist.
Plague epidemics have occurred in Africa, Asia, and South America; but since the 1990s, most human cases have occurred in Africa. The three most endemic countries are the Democratic Republic of Congo, Madagascar, and Peru. In Madagascar cases of bubonic plague are reported nearly every year, during the epidemic season .
Confirmation of plague requires lab testing. The best practice is to identify Y. pestis from a sample of pus from a bubo, blood or sputum. A specific Y. pestis antigen can be detected by different techniques. One of them is a laboratory validated rapid dipstick test now widely used in Africa and South America, with the support of WHO.
Untreated pneumonic plague can be rapidly fatal, so early diagnosis and treatment is essential for survival and reduction of complications. Antibiotics and supportive therapy are effective against plague if patients are diagnosed in time. Pneumonic plague can be fatal within 18 to 24 hours of disease onset if left untreated, but common antibiotics for enterobacteria can effectively cure the disease if they are delivered early.
Preventive measures include informing people when zoonotic plague is present in their environment and advising them to take precautions against flea bites and not to handle animal carcasses. Generally people should be advised to avoid direct contact with infected body fluids and tissues. When handling potentially infected patients and collecting specimens, standard precautions should apply. WHO does not recommend vaccination, except for high-risk groups (such as laboratory personnel who are constantly exposed to the risk of contamination, and health care workers).
Surveillance and control requires investigating animal and flea species implicated in the plague cycle in the region and developing environmental management programmes to understand the natural zoonosis of the disease cycle and to limit spread. Active long-term surveillance of animal foci, coupled with a rapid response during animal outbreaks has successfully reduced numbers of human plague outbreaks.
In order to effectively and efficiently manage plague outbreaks it is crucial to have an informed and vigilant health care work force to quickly diagnose and manage patients with infection, to identify risk factors, to conduct ongoing surveillance, to control vectors and hosts, to confirm diagnosis with laboratory tests, and to communicate findings with appropriate authorities. WHO aims to prevent plague outbreaks by maintaining surveillance and supporting at-risk countries to prepare. As the type of animal reservoir differs according to the region and influences the risk and conditions of human transmission, WHO has developed specific guidelines for the Indian sub-continent, South-America and Sub-Saharan Africa. WHO works with ministries of health to support countries facing outbreaks for field control activities.
Related
More
InfographicFacts about plague

========================================
pneumonia
========================================
Pneumonia is a form of acute respiratory infection that affects the lungs. The lungs are made up of small sacs called alveoli, which fill with air when a healthy person breathes. When an individual has pneumonia, the alveoli are filled with pus and fluid, which makes breathing painful and limits oxygen intake.
Pneumonia is the single largest infectious cause of death in children worldwide. Pneumonia killed 740 180 children under the age of 5 in 2019, accounting for 14% of all deaths of children under 5 years old but 22% of all deaths in children aged 1 to 5 years. Pneumonia affects children and families everywhere, but deaths are highest in southern Asia and sub-Saharan Africa. Children can be protected from pneumonia, it can be prevented with simple interventions, and it can be treated with low-cost, low-tech medication and care.
Pneumonia is caused by several infectious agents, including viruses, bacteria and fungi. The most common are the following.
Pneumonia can be spread in several ways. The viruses and bacteria that are commonly found in a child's nose or throat can infect the lungs if they are inhaled. They may also spread via air-borne droplets from a cough or sneeze. In addition, pneumonia may spread through blood, especially during and shortly after birth. More research needs to be done on the different pathogens causing pneumonia and the ways they are transmitted, as this is of critical importance for treatment and prevention.
The presenting features of viral and bacterial pneumonia are similar. However, the symptoms of viral pneumonia may be more numerous than the symptoms of bacterial pneumonia. In children under 5 years of age who have cough and/or difficult breathing, with or without fever, pneumonia is diagnosed by the presence of either fast breathing or lower chest wall indrawing where their chest moves in or retracts during inhalation . Wheezing is more common in viral infections.
Very severely ill infants may be unable to feed or drink and may also experience unconsciousness, hypothermia and convulsions.
While most healthy children can fight the infection with their natural defences, children whose immune systems are compromised are at higher risk of developing pneumonia. A child's immune system may be weakened by malnutrition or undernourishment, especially in infants who are not exclusively breastfed. Pre-existing illnesses, such as symptomatic HIV infections and measles, also increase a child's risk of contracting pneumonia. The following environmental factors also increase a child's susceptibility to pneumonia:
Pneumonia should be treated with antibiotics. The antibiotic of choice for first line treatment is amoxicillin dispersible tablets. Most cases of pneumonia require oral antibiotics, which are often prescribed at a health centre. These cases can also be diagnosed and treated with inexpensive oral antibiotics at the community level by trained community health workers. Hospitalization is recommended only for severe cases of pneumonia.
Preventing pneumonia in children is an essential component of a strategy to reduce child mortality. Immunization against Hib, pneumococcus, measles and whooping cough is the most effective way to prevent pneumonia. Adequate nutrition is key to improving children's natural defences, starting with exclusive breastfeeding for the first 6 months of life. In addition to being effective in preventing pneumonia, it also helps to reduce the length of the illness if a child does become ill.
Addressing environmental factors such as indoor air pollution and encouraging good hygiene in crowded homes also reduces the number of children who fall ill with pneumonia. In children infected with HIV, the antibiotic cotrimoxazole is given daily to decrease the risk of contracting pneumonia.
The WHO and UNICEF integrated Global Action Plan for Pneumonia and Diarrhoea aims to accelerate pneumonia control with a combination of interventions to protect, prevent and treat pneumonia in children with actions to:
Several countries including Bangladesh, India, Kenya, Uganda and Zambia have developed district, state and national plans to intensify actions for the control of pneumonia and diarrhoea. Many more have integrated diarrhoea and pneumonia specific action into their national child health and child survival strategies. Effective diagnosis and treatment of pneumonia is critical to improve child survival. To meet the Sustainable Development Goal targets for SDG 3.2.1 , ending preventable diarrhoea- and pneumonia-related deaths is an urgent priority. Related
News
Feature stories
Documents
More
Community-based amoxicillin treatment for fast breathing pneumonia in young infants 7–59 days old: a cluster randomised trial in rural Bangladesh, Ethiopia, India and Malawi Innovative, enhanced community management of non-hypoxaemic chest-indrawing pneumonia in 2–59-month-old children: a cluster-randomised trial in Africa and Asia

========================================
podoconiosis-(non-filarial-lymphoedema)
========================================
Podoconiosis is a non-infectious geochemical leg swelling caused by long-term exposure of bare feet to irritant soils. It is responsible for an estimated 4 million cases of lymphoedema in highland tropical and sub-tropical areas of 17 countries in Africa, Central and South America and South and South-East Asia. Podoconiosis affects poor, remote, subsistence farming communities and, by affecting livelihoods, it traps these communities in poverty. Women and girls are both more likely to contract podoconiosis and more likely to suffer from its social and economic consequences.
Interventions include prevention of contact with the soil through consistent wearing of shoes from an early age and daily foot washing. Treatment using a holistic lymphoedema management package has been demonstrated to decrease swelling, disability and incidence of acute attacks, improve quality of life, and can be readily mainstreamed into government community health services.
Globally, there is evidence of podoconiosis in 17 countries . Tropical African countries bear the highest disease burden with about 1.5 million people living with podoconiosis in Ethiopia, a further 40 000 in Cameroon, 9000 in Kenya and 7000 in Rwanda.
Podoconiosis is common among remote rural communities, in particular those dependent on subsistence farming and lacking access to footwear or water to wash the feet. The average age at first noticing leg swelling is 25 years, and the disease is common up to the sixth decade. The disease is more common in women: a recent meta-analysis concluded that the likelihood of podoconiosis among women was 1.15 times greater than among men.
The early symptoms of podoconiosis include a burning sensation and itching on the back of the feet. Skin thickening is accompanied by papillomatous growths around the sides of the feet and the heel. Reversible foot and lower leg oedema later becomes fixed and gradually progresses up the leg. Swelling is bilateral but often asymmetrical and the swelling is mostly limited to below the knees. Nodules and maceration between toes are common. Podoconiosis is a condition that is jointly influenced by genetic and environmental factors. No biological agent has been identified. There is an association between podoconiosis and areas of the genome often involved in T-cell mediated inflammatory responses, and an exaggerated helper T-cell response has been demonstrated in the lymph nodes of affected people. Although ecological evidence over several decades has linked red clay soils to podoconiosis, the exact causative agent within the soil remains unknown. Studies have suggested a role for smectite clays or certain elements including zirconium, aluminium and beryllium.
Treatment of podoconiosis is currently based on lymphoedema management , psychosocial and mental health support, and use of shoes to reduce exposure to irritant soil. Surgical removal of large nodules can be achieved with satisfactory healing rates, allowing patients to use custom designed shoes. The effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of a holistic physical and mental health care package for people with lymphoedema caused by lymphatic filariasis, leprosy or podoconiosis has been demonstrated. Expert patients can be trained to guide treatment for uncomplicated lymphoedema.
The key strategies for podoconiosis control are prevention of contact with irritant soil and lymphoedema morbidity management . Evidence from the past 5 years suggests that podoconiosis is amenable to public health interventions such as footwear and hygiene-based morbidity management, which reduce acute clinical episodes. Controlling podoconiosis is achievable given the absence of a biological agent or vector also needing control, the relatively small global scale of the problem, and the safe means of podoconiosis prevention and control.
The main challenge faced in podoconiosis control is lack of awareness that the condition exists and that it is different from lymphatic filariasis and other main causes of lymphoedema in the tropics, requiring different prevention and control strategies. Treatment is most effective when the disease is diagnosed early. Podoconiosis takes longer to identify than it should through lack of diagnostic tools that can be used in the community. There is also a lack of understanding of the exact environmental trigger. Finally, communities affected have little voice at regional or national level, and attention needs to be drawn to the structural inequities that contribute to the persistence of this preventable condition. Until recently, podoconiosis was assumed to lead to illness rather than deaths. However, the death rate among people with podoconiosis is greater than that of a comparison cohort in a similar setting, with an overall standardized mortality rate of 6. Podoconiosis also has severe social and economic consequences. Patients lose 45% of their economically productive time because of morbidity associated with the disease. In Ethiopia alone, it is estimated that podoconiosis causes 172 073 disability-adjusted life-years to be lost annually. Most of these DALYs are due to chronic lymphoedema, and only 2.6% are attributable to ADLA episodes. Podoconiosis is considered the most stigmatizing health problem in endemic areas. Patients have almost 7 times the risk of lower-than-average quality of life scores and 11 times the likelihood of depression than healthy neighbours.
Podoconiosis management and public health control measures can be integrated within the strategic framework for skin-related neglected tropical diseases, and the wider agenda of poverty reduction and Universal Health Coverage. Reducing the suffering of people affected by podoconiosis will rely on 2 of the public health strategies already recommended by WHO for NTDs:
Synergies in prevention include promotion of footwear and covering of house floors . The inclusion podoconiosis in the skin NTD framework will enhance surveillance and visibility.
Related
WHO's work on neglected tropical diseases News
Fact sheets

========================================
poliomyelitis
========================================
In 1988, the World Health Assembly adopted a resolution for the worldwide eradication of polio, marking the launch of the Global Polio Eradication Initiative , a unique global public-private partnership. Since then, the incidence of polio worldwide has been reduced by 99%, and the world stands on the threshold of eradicating a human disease globally for only the second time in history, after smallpox in 1980.
Wild poliovirus cases have decreased by over 99% since 1988, from an estimated 350 000 cases in more than 125 endemic countries then, to two endemic countries).
Polio is a highly infectious disease caused by a virus. It invades the nervous system and can cause total paralysis in a matter of hours. The virus is transmitted by person-to-person spread mainly through the faecal-oral route or, less frequently, by a common vehicle and multiplies in the intestine. Initial symptoms are fever, fatigue, headache, vomiting, stiffness of the neck and pain in the limbs. One in 200 infections leads to irreversible paralysis . Among those paralysed, 5–10% die when their breathing muscles become immobilized.
Polio mainly affects children under 5 years of age. However, anyone of any age who is unvaccinated can contract the disease. There is no cure for polio, it can only be prevented. Polio vaccine, given multiple times, can protect a child for life. There are two vaccines available: oral polio vaccine and inactivated polio vaccine. Both are effective and safe, and both are used in different combinations worldwide, depending on local epidemiological and programmatic circumstances, to ensure the best possible protection to populations can be provided.
The strategies for polio eradication work when they are fully implemented. This is clearly demonstrated by the successful eradication of the disease in most countries of the world.
The Polio Eradication Strategy lays out the roadmap to securing a lasting and sustained world, free of all polioviruses, and transition and polio post-certification efforts are ongoing to assure that the infrastructure built up to eradicate polio will continue to benefit broader public health efforts, long after the disease is gone. Key to success is ensuring the Strategy is fully implemented in all areas and is fully resourced. Failure to implement strategic approaches, however, leads to ongoing transmission of the virus. Endemic transmission of wild poliovirus is continuing in areas of Afghanistan and Pakistan. Failure to stop polio in these last remaining areas could result in global resurgence of the disease. That is why it is critical to ensure polio is eradicated completely, once and for all.
Once polio is eradicated, the world can celebrate the delivery of a major global public good that will benefit all people equally, no matter where they live. Economic modelling has found that the eradication of polio would save at least US$ 40–50 billion, mostly in low-income countries. Most importantly, success will mean that no child will ever again suffer the terrible effects of lifelong polio-paralysis.
The global effort to eradicate polio has been declared a Public Health Initiative of International Concern, under the International Health Regulations, and temporary recommendations by an Emergency Committee under the International Health Regulations have been issued to countries affected by poliovirus transmission or are at high risk of re-emergence of the disease. The polio effort continues to support broader public health efforts, including helping respond to natural disasters, humanitarian emergencies, droughts, earthquakes, outbreaks of other infectious diseases and supporting disease surveillance for broader public health initiatives.
WHO, together with its GPEI partners, continues to support countries which remain affected by poliovirus or are at high risk of polio re-emergence in implementing eradication strategies, focusing in the first instance on immunization and disease surveillance. Since the GPEI was launched, the number of cases has fallen by over 99%.
In 1994, the WHO Region of the Americas was certified polio-free, followed by the WHO Western Pacific Region in 2000 and the WHO European Region in June 2002. On 27 March 2014, the WHO South-East Asia Region was certified polio-free, meaning that transmission of wild poliovirus has been interrupted in this bloc of 11 countries stretching from Indonesia to India. In 2020, Africa became the fifth region to be certified wild poliovirus-free.
More than 20 million people are able to walk today who would otherwise have been paralysed. An estimated 1.5 million childhood deaths have been prevented through the systematic administration of vitamin A during polio immunization activities.
For further information
Visit www.polioeradication.org
Related
News
Feature stories
Commentaries
More
VideosThe Polio Surveillance SystemResponding to a Polio OutbreakPolio Eradication - Reaching Every Last ChildVaccine-derived polioviruses

========================================
polycystic-ovary-syndrome
========================================
Polycystic ovary syndrome is a common hormonal condition that affects women of reproductive age. It usually starts during adolescence, but symptoms may fluctuate over time. PCOS can cause hormonal imbalances, irregular periods, excess androgen levels and cysts in the ovaries. Irregular periods, usually with a lack of ovulation, can make it difficult to become pregnant. PCOS is a leading cause of infertility.
PCOS is a chronic condition and cannot be cured. However, some symptoms can be improved through lifestyle changes, medications and fertility treatments. The cause of PCOS is unknown but women with a family history or type 2 diabetes are at higher risk.
PCOS a significant public health problem and is one of the commonest hormonal disturbances affecting women of reproductive age. The condition affects an estimated 6–13% of women of reproductive age, and up to 70% of cases are undiagnosed. The prevalence of PCOS is higher among some ethnicities and these groups often experience more complications, in particular related to metabolic problems. The biological and psychological effects of PCOS, particularly those related to obesity, body image and infertility, can lead to mental health challenges and social stigma. Symptoms of polycystic ovary syndrome can differ from person to person. Symptoms may change over time and often occur without a clear trigger. Possible symptoms include:
People with PCOS are more likely to have other health conditions including:
PCOS can also cause anxiety, depression and a negative body image. Some symptoms such as infertility, obesity and unwanted hair growth can lead to social stigma. This can affect other life areas such as family, relationships, work and involvement in the community. Polycystic ovary syndrome is diagnosed by the presence of at least two out of the following:
Blood tests can be used to identify characteristic changes in hormone levels, although these changes are not universal. Women with polycystic ovary syndromemay have elevated levels of: When making a diagnosis, doctors also take into account that irregular periods and ovulation can be a normal part of puberty or menopause, having polycystic ovaries may run in families, and women with a family history of PCOS or type 2 diabetes are at higher risk of PCOS. In addition, the ultrasound picture is not always clear and some women with PCOS may have an ultrasound scan that does not demonstrate polycystic ovaries.
There is no cure for PCOS, but treatments can improve symptoms.
People who have irregular periods, trouble getting pregnant or excessive acne and hair growth should speak to a healthcare professional.
Some symptoms of PCOS can be reduced through lifestyle changes. Eating a healthy diet and getting enough exercise can help reduce weight and reduce the risk of type 2 diabetes. Birth control medicines can help regulate the menstrual cycle and reduce symptoms. Other medicines can reduce acne or unwanted hair growth caused by PCOS. Treatments for infertility due to PCOS include lifestyle changes, medicines or surgery to stimulate regular ovulation. In-vitro fertilization may be used but it has some risks.
WHO works with Member States and partners to address PCOS as part of its efforts to improve women’s health and reproductive well-being globally. WHO works with governmental and non-governmental partners to enhance public awareness related to PCOS, and to generate guidance to healthcare providers on how it can be identified and treated. In addition, WHO promotes research related to the most effective ways of preventing, diagnosing and treating infertility due to PCOS, and identifies the most important unanswered questions related to it. WHO supports the generation of statistics on how common infertility and its causes are. WHO helps member states to pay more attention to infertility and its causes within national health policies, services and financing to ensure that everyone who needs healthcare related to infertility is able to obtain it without financial hardship.
News
Fact sheets

========================================
post-covid-19-condition-(long-covid)
========================================
COVID-19 can lead to serious long-term effects, known as post COVID-19 condition . It is also commonly referred to as long COVID. Post COVID-19 condition is characterized by a range of symptoms which usually start within 3 months of the initial COVID-19 illness and last at least 2 months. PCC can affect a person’s ability to perform daily activities such as work or household chores and restrict social participation.
Millions of people have been affected with post COVID-19 condition since the beginning of the pandemic (1). Global estimates indicate that 6 in 100 people with COVID-19 develop post COVID-19 condition. Estimates largely come from people who suffered COVID-19 early in the pandemic , and there is a very large variation in estimates (2). More recent research shows the chances of developing post COVID-19 condition have reduced, but these data are limited and mostly from high-income countries (3). However, the SARS-CoV-2 virus, the virus that causes COVID-19 is widely circulating and post COVID-19 condition remains a substantial threat and ongoing challenge to global public health. Anyone who was infected with SARS-CoV-2 can develop post COVID-19 condition. Some people have higher risk. These include women, older adults, smokers, those who are overweight or obese or have pre-existing chronic health problems. Repeated infections and severe COVID-19 needing hospitalization or ICU admission also increase the risk (4). We see higher numbers of post COVID-19 condition sufferers among people with disabilities, and where health disparity and access to health care is a problem (5).
Research is ongoing to better understand what causes post COVID-19 condition. Almost any organ can be affected, including the heart and blood vessels, lungs, nervous system, gut and endocrine system. In those with post COVID-19 condition, researchers have found evidence of persistence of SARS-CoV2 virus in the body, of altered immune responses and autoimmunity, and of formation of microscopic blood clots , among other problems (6). Over 200 different symptoms have been reported by people with post COVID-19 condition. Common symptoms include: Impaired sleep, depression and anxiety also occur (5). These symptoms might persist from their initial illness or develop after their recovery. Symptoms can be mild to severely debilitating, and affect someone’s capacity to work, perform their daily activities or do exercise.
With increasing understanding of post COVID-19 condition, some clinical patterns have become clearer. There are symptoms which tend to occur together, for example dizziness, palpitations, light-headedness on standing, and exercise intolerance , symptoms of post exertional malaise, or myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (7). Other medical conditions can occur more often than usual after having COVID-19. These include kidney impairment, heart disease, stroke, diabetes and mental health disorders, among other conditions (8). Post COVID-19 condition can affect the ability to work and may lead to loss of productivity, and a reduction in income and quality of life. Ongoing medical needs of people with the condition may stretch existing health systems. Symptoms of post COVID-19 condition generally improve over time, typically 4–9 months. Approximately 15 in 100 people still have symptoms at 12 months as per global estimates from 2022 (2). The individual needs of patients with post COVID-19 condition vary. At the present time, there remains limited research on treatments and a lack of large studies to understand the most effective treatments. However, doctors and their patients may make individualized treatment decisions based on knowledge from similar medical conditions. Health-care providers may offer medications for symptomatic relief as needed. Additionally, newly diagnosed medical problems occurring after COVID-19 frequently have well-established treatments, for example kidney disease or stroke. Many symptoms and functional impairment can be managed effectively by rehabilitation, and with careful communication between primary care practitioners and medical specialists. Education about the importance of quality rest and sleep and skills training on energy conservation techniques can help patients manage their symptoms better. Health-care providers can discuss with patients about self-management strategies to respond promptly to a flare-up or relapse, such as identifying possible triggers, temporarily reducing activity levels, monitoring symptoms over time, and not returning to usual activity levels until the flare-up has resolved. Use of assistive devices and environmental modifications at work and home may be needed in some instances. People can be reinfected with SARS-CoV-2 multiple times. Each time, they have a risk of developing post COVID-19 condition. Therefore, risk reduction with preventive measures such as the use of masks, personal hygiene and ventilation in high-risk situations continues to be important. Receiving two doses of vaccination appears to reduce the likelihood chance of developing post COVID-19 condition (9). WHO first started work on post COVID-19 condition in the first wave of the global COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 when reports began to emerge that some patients had persistent symptoms weeks or months following SARS-CoV-2 infection. To better understand this phenomenon, WHO met with patient advocates, researchers, health-care providers and public health professionals and by September 2020, established emergency international classification of disease codes for post COVID-19 condition. Since then, WHO has developed a clinical case definition of post COVID-19 condition to recognize the condition and its impact on people’s lives. This definition was developed by patients, researchers and clinical experts, representing all WHO regions, with the understanding that the definition may change as new evidence emerges and our understanding of the consequences of COVID-19 evolves. A separate clinical case definition for post COVID-19 condition in children and adolescents is also available. WHO has been organizing webinars on post COVID-19 condition since February 2021 to expand understanding of the condition and its impact on patients’ lives, and foster research and collaboration. A global webinar series on the medical management of post COVID-19 condition is organized each month and has been running since 2023. A WHO Guideline Development Group consisting of global experts, frontline providers and affected individuals is presently at work on guidelines on diagnosis, treatment and rehabilitation in post COVID-19 condition. We advocate for governments and funders to support research on post COVID-19 condition in the interest of improved understanding of this condition around the world, not just in high-income countries, and design optimal clinical care for patients. National authorities are encouraged to plan and budget for multidisciplinary post COVID-19 condition programmes and to ensure equitable access to relevant therapies.
References Related
News
Fact sheets
More
Global Long COVID Webinar Series Global Long COVID Webinar Series

========================================
post-traumatic-stress-disorder
========================================
Many people feel extreme fear during or after witnessing or experiencing potentially traumatic events, such as war, accidents, natural disasters or sexual violence. Most people exposed to such events will experience distress but will recover naturally with time. Some people continue to experience a range of mental health conditions that can persist for months or even years, including PTSD, depressive disorders, anxiety disorders and substance use disorders. Around 70% of people globally will experience a potentially traumatic event during their lifetime (1), But only a minority will go on to develop PTSD (2). An estimated 3.9% of the world population has experienced PTSD at some point in their lives (2). The likelihood of developing PTSD varies depending on the type of traumatic event experienced. For example, rates of PTSD are more than three times higher among people exposed to violent conflict or war (3). PTSD rates are especially high following sexual violence (1). Up to 40% of people with PTSD recover within one year (1). There are many effective treatments for PTSD, yet only 1 in 4 people with PTSD in low- and middle-income countries report seeking any form of treatment (2). Barriers to care include lack of awareness that PTSD can be treated, lack of availability of mental health services, social stigma and lack of trained mental health care providers. Experiencing distress or other mental health difficulties after a potentially traumatic event is common but does not mean someone is experiencing PTSD. Someone experiences PTSD when they have symptoms re-experiencing the event, avoid reminders of the event and experience symptoms of heightened arousal that cause significant distress, and interfere with daily activities and family, social, school or working life. People with PTSD have repeated and unwanted recollections of the traumatic event(s), which make them feel as if the event(s) is happening all over again. These memories are accompanied by intense fear or horror. They may be experienced as images, sounds , smells or other sensations. These recollections might occur through intrusive memories, nightmares, or, in severe cases, flashbacks. During flashbacks, the person might momentarily believe and act as if they were back at the time of the event, experiencing it again. People with PTSD avoid situations, activities, thoughts or memories that remind them of the traumatic event(s). They may even avoid talking about the event(s) with their family or health care providers. People usually use these strategies to try to avoid distressing recollections. Yet avoidance strategies may inadvertently intensify re-experiencing symptoms over time and thus perpetuate the presence of PTSD.
People with PTSD may experience a heightened sense of danger, even when they are not actually at risk. This can involve them being much more vigilant than usual, for example constantly scanning their surroundings for potential threats or feeling the need to sit with their back against a wall in public places. They may be more easily startled or jumpy, reacting with excessive fear to sudden movements or loud noises. Symptoms of PTSD typically begin immediately after or within one month of a traumatic event. In younger children, symptoms are often behavioural and can include re-enacting the traumatic event during play or in drawings. Children often unjustly blame themselves for what happened. The experience of PTSD can also vary across cultures. For instance, in some cultures, it may be more acceptable to express anger about the event, making this a more prominent experience. In other cultures, people with PTSD may more commonly have physical complaints with unclear causes, such as headaches or gastrointestinal symptoms. People with PTSD may also have depressive disorder, anxiety disorders and substance use disorders as well as suicidal thoughts and behaviours. Many of the effects of PTSD are also known risk factors for physical diseases such as cardiovascular disease.
PTSD, like other mental health conditions, results from interacting social, psychological and biological factors. Anyone can experience PTSD after a potentially traumatic event, but people who have previously experienced traumatic events are more susceptible. Women are more likely to experience PTSD than men. Other factors, including a family history of mental health conditions, younger age, and lower levels of education, can also increase the likelihood of developing PTSD after a potentially traumatic experience.
The nature of the event experienced can also affect the chances of developing PTSD. For example, experiencing ongoing or repeated potentially traumatic events, developing a serious physical injury during the event(s), or witnessing harm to others can all increase risk. Receiving social support following potentially traumatic events can reduce the risk for PTSD. There are many effective treatments for people with PTSD. Evidence-based psychological interventions are the first choice treatments and can be delivered to individuals or groups, in person or online. Some may also be accessed through self-help manuals, websites and apps. Psychological interventions can help people learn new ways of thinking and coping that may reduce their symptoms. They can help people manage difficult situations and address the events, people or places that trigger their traumatic memories. The psychological interventions with the most evidence for effective treatment of PTSD are those based on cognitive behavioural therapy with a trauma focus and eye movement desensitization and reprocessing . Many of these involve exposure techniques, in which the person is asked to recall, narrate or imagine the traumatic event(s) so that they are exposed to their memories within a safe and supportive environment. Psychological interventions for PTSD may also include real or imagined exposure to triggers that may evoke traumatic memories. Self-care can have an important role in supporting treatment for PTSD. To help manage symptoms and promote overall well-being, a person can:
WHO’s Comprehensive mental health action plan 2013–2030 highlights the actions required to provide appropriate interventions for people with mental health conditions, including people exposed to potentially traumatic events and experiencing PTSD. PTSD is included in the priority conditions covered by WHO’s mhGAP Programme, which includes guidelines for managing PTSD. This programme aims to help countries increase services for people with mental, neurological and substance use disorders in non-specialized settings in LMICs and is being implemented in more than 100 countries. WHO responds to the mental health needs of people exposed to conflict and natural disasters in a range of countries and, with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, has published an mhGAP Humanitarian Intervention Guide, which includes a module on managing PTSD in non-specialized health care settings during emergencies.
References
Related
Comprehensive mental health action plan 2013–2030
Mental Health Gap Action Programme More on mental health
Fact sheets

========================================
pre-eclampsia
========================================
Key FactsPre-eclampsia affects 2–8% of pregnancies worldwide.There are around 46 000 maternal deaths due to pre-eclampsia per year and around 500 000 fetal or newborn deaths (1).Pre-eclampsia and eclampsia are responsible for approximately 10% of maternal deaths in Asia and Africa, and 25% in Latin America.Magnesium sulfate reduces the risk of eclampsia by more than half. Despite the availability of magnesium sulfate, its use is still limited in many low-resource settings.Pre-eclampsia and eclampsia contribute significantly to maternal and perinatal morbidity and mortality.OverviewPre-eclampsia is a high blood pressure disorder that typically develops after 20 weeks into pregnancy. It can present serious risks to both mother and baby. Early detection and management are crucial to prevent progression to eclampsia, which involves seizures. Both conditions can be life-threatening.Diagnosis Pre-eclampsia is diagnosed based on the onset of hypertension and proteinuria after 20 weeks of gestation. Severe pre-eclampsia may include symptoms such as severe headaches, visual disturbances and upper abdominal pain.Risk factors Several factors can increase the risk of developing pre-eclampsia during pregnancy. Understanding these risk factors is essential for proactive monitoring and management. Having a risk factor doesn't always mean pre-eclampsia will occur, but closer medical supervision beyond routine screening is recommended.Several factors can increase the risk of developing pre-eclampsia, including:first-time pregnanciesmultiple pregnancies obesitypre-existing conditions such as hypertension, diabetes or kidney diseasefamily history of pre-eclampsia.Symptoms Symptoms of pre-eclampsia can vary significantly among individuals. While some may experience a range of noticeable symptoms, others may remain asymptomatic. It is important to be aware of potential indicators and seek medical attention if any concerns arise during pregnancy or after childbirth.Common symptoms of pre-eclampsia include:persistent high blood pressureproteinuriasevere headachesvisual disturbances upper abdominal painnausea and vomiting swelling in the hands and face.ComplicationsPre-eclampsia, if left untreated, can lead to serious complications for both mother and baby. These complications can range from short-term issues to long-term health problems. Prompt medical intervention is crucial to minimize these risks.Complications can be severe and include:eclampsia HELLP syndrome organ damage placental abruptionpreterm birthfetal growth restrictionmaternal and fetal death.Treatment and management The primary treatment for pre-eclampsia is the administration of magnesium sulfate to prevent seizures. The treatment and management of pre-eclampsia depend on the severity of the condition and the gestational age of the pregnancy. The goal is to prevent complications and have the best possible outcomes for the mother and the pregnancy. Determining when to end the pregnancy and deliver the baby is critical for treating pre-eclampsia.Other management strategies include:antihypertensive medications to control blood pressurecorticosteroids to accelerate fetal lung maturity if preterm delivery is anticipatedclose monitoring of maternal and fetal health. Prevention While there's no guaranteed way to prevent pre-eclampsia, certain strategies can help lower the risk. Early and consistent prenatal care is essential for monitoring and managing potential risk factors. Preventive measures focus on regular prenatal care to monitor for early signs of pre-eclampsia. Recommendations include:regular blood pressure checksurine tests for proteinuriamonitoring for symptoms such as headaches and visual disturbanceslifestyle considerations, such as maintaining a healthy weight and activity managing pre-existing conditions, especially pre-existing high blood pressure.Additional prevention measures include: low dose of aspirin by 20 weeks or when antenatal care beginscalcium supplementation in settings with low dietary intaketreatment of pre-existing high blood pressure with antihypertensive medications.WHO responseThe World Health Organization develops guidelines to improve health during pregnancy. This includes prevention and treatment of pre-eclampsia and eclampsia and continuously reviewing evidence to see if revisions in the recommendations are needed so that improvements in care can be effected. These guidelines aim to reduce maternal and perinatal morbidity and mortality by promoting evidence-based clinical practices. Key WHO recommendations include:calcium supplementation during pregnancy in areas with low dietary calcium intakelow-dose aspirin during pregnancy for women at high risk of pre-eclampsiause of magnesium sulfate for the prevention of eclampsiatraining health-care providers in the early detection and management of pre-eclampsiastrengthening health systems to ensure timely and effective care for pregnant women.By implementing these guidelines, WHO aims to address the profound inequities in maternal and perinatal health globally and achieve the health targets of the Sustainable Development Goals . ReferencesGlobal and regional causes of maternal deaths 2009–20: a WHO systematic analysis. Lancet Glob Health. 2025. Pre-eclampsia is a high blood pressure disorder that typically develops after 20 weeks into pregnancy. It can present serious risks to both mother and baby. Early detection and management are crucial to prevent progression to eclampsia, which involves seizures. Both conditions can be life-threatening.
Pre-eclampsia is diagnosed based on the onset of hypertension and proteinuria after 20 weeks of gestation. Severe pre-eclampsia may include symptoms such as severe headaches, visual disturbances and upper abdominal pain.
Several factors can increase the risk of developing pre-eclampsia during pregnancy. Understanding these risk factors is essential for proactive monitoring and management. Having a risk factor doesn't always mean pre-eclampsia will occur, but closer medical supervision beyond routine screening is recommended.
Several factors can increase the risk of developing pre-eclampsia, including:
Symptoms of pre-eclampsia can vary significantly among individuals. While some may experience a range of noticeable symptoms, others may remain asymptomatic. It is important to be aware of potential indicators and seek medical attention if any concerns arise during pregnancy or after childbirth.
Common symptoms of pre-eclampsia include:
Pre-eclampsia, if left untreated, can lead to serious complications for both mother and baby. These complications can range from short-term issues to long-term health problems. Prompt medical intervention is crucial to minimize these risks.
Complications can be severe and include:
The primary treatment for pre-eclampsia is the administration of magnesium sulfate to prevent seizures. The treatment and management of pre-eclampsia depend on the severity of the condition and the gestational age of the pregnancy. The goal is to prevent complications and have the best possible outcomes for the mother and the pregnancy. Determining when to end the pregnancy and deliver the baby is critical for treating pre-eclampsia.
Other management strategies include:
While there's no guaranteed way to prevent pre-eclampsia, certain strategies can help lower the risk. Early and consistent prenatal care is essential for monitoring and managing potential risk factors. Preventive measures focus on regular prenatal care to monitor for early signs of pre-eclampsia. Recommendations include:
Additional prevention measures include: The World Health Organization develops guidelines to improve health during pregnancy. This includes prevention and treatment of pre-eclampsia and eclampsia and continuously reviewing evidence to see if revisions in the recommendations are needed so that improvements in care can be effected. These guidelines aim to reduce maternal and perinatal morbidity and mortality by promoting evidence-based clinical practices. Key WHO recommendations include:
By implementing these guidelines, WHO aims to address the profound inequities in maternal and perinatal health globally and achieve the health targets of the Sustainable Development Goals .
References
Related
Fact sheets
More
WHO recommendations for prevention and treatment of pre-eclampsia and eclampsia, 2011WHO recommendations on antiplatelet agents for the prevention of pre-eclampsia, 2021WHO recommendation: Calcium supplementation during pregnancy for the prevention of pre-eclampsia and its complications, 2018WHO recommendations on drug treatment for non-severe hypertension in pregnancy, 2020WHO recommendations: drug treatment for severe hypertension in pregnancy, 2018WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience, 2016

========================================
prequalification-of-medicines-by-who
========================================
Every year, billions of US dollars worth of medicines are purchased by international procurement agencies for distribution in resource-limited countries. Prequalification is intended to give these agencies the choice of a wide range of quality medicines for bulk purchase. Prequalification consists of five components.
The WHO Prequalification of Medicines Programme , other UN agencies and UNITAID, issue an invitation to manufacturers to submit an expression of interest for product evaluation. Only products included in an EOI are eligible for prequalification.
The inclusion of a medicine in an EOI is based on one or more of three criteria: The manufacturer provides a comprehensive set of data about the quality, safety and efficacy of the product submitted for evaluation. This includes:
A team of assessors evaluates all the data presented. Assessment teams include WHO staff and experts from national regulatory authorities worldwide.
A team of inspectors verifies that the manufacturing sites for the finished pharmaceutical product and its active pharmaceutical ingredient(s) comply with WHO good manufacturing practice. They also verify that any contract research organization that conducted any clinical studies relating to the submitted product complies with WHO good clinical practice and WHO good laboratory practice.
If the product is found to meet the specified requirements, and the associated manufacturing site(s) and contract research organization(s) are compliant with WHO standards, the product is added to the WHO list of prequalified medicinal products. The WHO prequalification of medicines process can take as little as three months, provided the data presented are complete and demonstrate that the product meets all required standards. If data are insufficient, however, the process can take considerably longer since the manufacturer must submit the necessary data for reassessment. To ensure that prequalified products continue to meet WHO specifications, PQP regularly re-inspects manufacturing sites of prequalified products. It also evaluates any changes made to specifications, manufacturing processes and quality control of prequalified products, and conducts random quality control tests on sampled prequalified products.
PQP bases its activities on international pharmaceutical standards for medicines quality, safety and efficacy. As well as prequalifying medicines, it also prequalifies pharmaceutical quality control laboratories and active pharmaceutical ingredients, and conducts considerable advocacy for medicines of guaranteed quality. Its long-term goal is to increase the availability of quality-assured medicines by assisting manufacturers to comply with WHO standards and supporting regulatory authorities to implement them. It does not seek to replace national regulatory authorities or national authorization systems for importation of medicines. In addition to evaluation and inspection activities, PQP builds national capacity for sustainable manufacturing and monitoring of quality medicines, by organizing training and hands-on experience at the country-level. It also offers a three-month rotational post at WHO headquarters to national regulatory staff from developing countries. By working closely with senior Programme assessors, incumbents increase their technical expertise and enhance information exchange between their regulatory authority and PQP on their return to their home country. Each of these activities promotes communication between stakeholders on pharmaceutical issues relating to quality. Additionally, PQP provides targeted technical assistance for manufacturers and quality control laboratories. Assistance is delivered by specialists who are not involved in WHO prequalification assessment or inspection activities, but who can conduct audits and training at country-level. This assistance is aimed at resolving specific technical problems. PQP is a United Nations programme managed by WHO. It is the only global medicines quality assurance programme. No other global body receives the active support of regulatory experts from both developed and developing countries. Related
News
Fact sheets
Feature stories
Documents

========================================
preterm-birth
========================================
Preterm is defined as babies born alive before 37 weeks of pregnancy are completed. There are sub-categories of preterm birth, based on gestational age:
Babies may be born preterm because of spontaneous preterm labour or because there is a medical indication to plan an induction of labour or caesarean birth early.
An estimated 13.4 million babies were born too early in 2020. That is more than 1 in 10 babies. Approximately 900 000 children die in 2019 of complications of preterm birth (1). Many survivors face a lifetime of disability, including learning disabilities and visual and hearing problems.
Globally, prematurity is the leading cause of death in children under the age of 5 years. Inequalities in survival rates around the world are stark. In low-income settings, half of the babies born at or below 32 weeks die due to a lack of feasible, cost-effective care such as warmth, breastfeeding support and basic care for infections and breathing difficulties. In high-income countries, almost all these babies survive. Suboptimal use of technology in middle-income settings is causing an increased burden of disability among preterm babies who survive the neonatal period.
Preterm birth occurs for a variety of reasons. Most preterm births happen spontaneously, but some are due to medical reasons such as infections, or other pregnancy complications that require early induction of labour or caesarean birth.
More research is needed to determine the causes and mechanisms of preterm birth. Causes include multiple pregnancies, infections and chronic conditions such as diabetes and high blood pressure; however, often no cause is identified. There could also be a genetic influence. The majority of preterm births occur in southern Asia and sub-Saharan Africa, but preterm birth is truly a global problem. There is a dramatic difference in survival of premature babies depending on where they are born. For example, more than 90% of extremely preterm babies born in low-income countries die within the first few days of life, yet less than 10% of extremely preterm babies die in high-income settings.
Preventing deaths and complications from preterm birth starts with a healthy pregnancy. WHO’s antenatal care guidelines include key interventions to help prevent preterm birth, such as counselling on healthy diet, optimal nutrition, and tobacco and substance use; fetal measurements including use of early ultrasound to help determine gestational age and detect multiple pregnancies; and a minimum of 8 contacts with health professionals throughout pregnancy – starting before 12 weeks – to identify and manage risk factors such as infections. If a woman experiences preterm labour or is at risk of preterm childbirth, treatments are available to help protect the preterm baby from future neurological impairment as well as difficulties with breathing and infection. These include antenatal steroids and tocolytic treatments to delay labour and antibiotics for preterm prolabour rupture of membranes .
In 2022, WHO also published new recommendations on the care of the preterm infant. These reflect new evidence that simple interventions such as kangaroo mother care immediately after birth, early initiation of breastfeeding, use of continuous positive airway pressure and medicines such as caffeine for breathing problems can substantially reduce mortality in preterm and low birthweight babies. WHO guidance stresses the need to ensure the mother and family take the pivotal role in their baby’s care. Mothers and newborns should remain together from birth and not be separated unless the baby is critically ill. The recommendations further call for improvements in family support including education and counselling, peer support and home visits by trained health-care providers.
WHO is committed to reducing the health problems and lives lost as a result of preterm birth, including working with Member States and partners to implement Every newborn: an action plan to end preventable deaths, adopted in May 2014 in the framework of the UN Secretary-General’s Global strategy for women’s and children’s health; and strengthening the availability and quality of data on preterm births. WHO regularly updates clinical guidelines for the management of pregnancy and mothers with preterm labour or at risk of preterm birth, and guidelines on the care of preterm and low birth weight babies.
WHO also supports countries to implement WHO's guidelines, aimed at reducing the risk of negative pregnancy outcomes, including preterm births, and ensuring a positive pregnancy and postnatal experience for all women and their infants. This includes developing and updating tools to improve health-care providers’ skills, knowledge and behaviours, and assess the quality of care provided to mothers at risk of preterm delivery and preterm babies. WHO also undertakes research to improve care for women and preterm newborns in low- and middle-income countries, including the WHO ACTION Trials ; the nutritional management of growth faltering in early infancy trial; and an implementation research trial to scale-up immediate kangaroo mother care . WHO works with partners around the world to conduct research into the causes of preterm birth and provides updated analyses of global preterm birth levels and trends every 3 to 5 years. References
1. Ohuma E, Moller A-B, Bradley E, et al. National, regional, and worldwide estimates of preterm birth in 2020, with trends from 2010: a systematic analysis. Lancet. 2023;402 :1261-1271. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(23)00878-4.
2. Perin J, Mulick A, Yeung D, et al. Global, regional, and national causes of under-5 mortality in 2000-19: an updated systematic analysis with implications for the Sustainable Development Goals. Lancet Child Adolesc Health 2022; 6(2): 106-15.
Related
WHO recommendations
Data and evidence Related
News
Fact sheets
Feature stories
Events
Documents

========================================
primary-health-care
========================================
The concept of PHC has been repeatedly reinterpreted and redefined in the years since 1978, leading to confusion about the term and its practice. A clear and simple definition has been developed to facilitate the coordination of future PHC efforts at the global, national and local levels and to guide their implementation: "PHC is a whole-of-society approach to health that aims at ensuring the highest possible level of health and well-being and their equitable distribution by focusing on people’s needs and as early as possible along the continuum from health promotion and disease prevention to treatment, rehabilitation and palliative care, and as close as feasible to people’s everyday environment."
PHC entails three inter-related and synergistic components, including: comprehensive integrated health services that embrace primary care as well as public health goods and functions as central pieces; multi-sectoral policies and actions to address the upstream and wider determinants of health; and engaging and empowering individuals, families and communities for increased social participation and enhanced self-care and self-reliance in health.
PHC is rooted in a commitment to social justice, equity, solidarity and participation. It is based on the recognition that the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of health is one of the fundamental rights of every human being without distinction.
For universal health coverage to be truly universal, a shift is needed from health systems designed around diseases and institutions towards health systems designed for people, with people. PHC requires governments at all levels to underscore the importance of action beyond the health sector in order to pursue a whole-of government approach to health, including health-in-all-policies, a strong focus on equity and interventions that encompass the entire life-course.
PHC addresses the broader determinants of health and focuses on the comprehensive and interrelated aspects of physical, mental and social health and well-being. It provides whole-person care for health needs throughout the lifespan, not just for a set of specific diseases. Primary health care ensures people receive quality comprehensive care – ranging from promotion and prevention to treatment, rehabilitation and palliative care – as close as feasible to people’s everyday environment.
Member States have committed to primary health care renewal and implementation as the cornerstone of a sustainable health system for UHC, health related Sustainable Development Goals and health security. PHC provides the programmatic engine for UHC, the health-related SDGs and health security. This commitment has been codified and reiterated in the Declaration of Astana, the accompanying World Health Assembly Resolution 72/2, Global Monitoring Reports on UHC, and the United Nations General Assembly high-level declarations on UHC. UHC, the health-related SDGs and health security goals are ambitious but achievable. Progress must be urgently accelerated, and PHC provides the means to do so.
PHC is the most inclusive, equitable, cost-effective and efficient approach to enhance people’s physical and mental health, as well as social well-being. Evidence of wide-ranging impact of investment in PHC continues to grow around the world, particularly in times of crisis such as the COVID-19 pandemic.
Across the world, investments in PHC improve equity and access, health-care performance, accountability of health systems, and health outcomes. While some of these factors are directly related to the health system and access to health services, the evidence is clear that a broad range of factors beyond health services play a critical role in shaping health and well-being. These include social protection, food systems, education and environmental factors, among others.
PHC is also critical to make health systems more resilient to situations of crisis, more proactive in detecting early signs of epidemics and more prepared to act early in response to surges in demand for services. Although the evidence is still evolving there is widespread recognition that PHC is the so-called front door of the health system and provides the foundation for the strengthening of the essential public health functions to confront public health crises such as COVID-19.
WHO is helping countries to reorient their health systems towards PHC as a key means towards achieving UHC, SDG3 and health security. Health systems should be fit for people, fit for context and fit for purpose. Health system strengthening involves strengthening of health governance and financing; the health workforce; gender, equity and rights; information systems; quality and patient safety; maternal, newborn, child and adolescent health through to healthy ageing; sexual and reproductive health; medicines and medical supplies; emergency preparedness, response and recovery; work on communicable and non-communicable diseases, among others.
WHO has identified three strategic areas of work to strengthen PHC worldwide.
Related
News
Fact sheets
Events

========================================
protecting-workers'-health
========================================
Economically active people spend on an average about one third of their time at the workplace. Employment and working conditions have powerful effects on health equity. Good working conditions can provide social protection and status, personal development opportunities, and protection from physical and psychosocial hazards. They can also improve social relations and self esteem of employees and lead to positive health effects. The health of workers is an essential prerequisite for household income, productivity and economic development. Therefore, restoring and maintaining working capacity is an important function of the health services.
Health risks at the workplace, such as heat, noise, dust, hazardous chemicals, unsafe machines and psychological stress, cause occupational diseases and can aggravate other health problems. Conditions of employment, occupation and the position in the workplace hierarchy also affect health. People working under stress or with precarious employment conditions are likely to smoke more, exercise less and have an unhealthy diet. In addition to general health care, all workers – and particularly those in high-risk occupations – need health services to assess and reduce exposure to occupational risks, as well as medical surveillance for early detection of occupational and work-related diseases and injuries. Chronic respiratory diseases, musculoskeletal disorders, noise-induced hearing loss and skin problems are the most common occupational diseases. Yet only one third of countries have programmes in place to address these issues. Work-related noncommunicable diseases as well as cardiovascular diseases and depression caused by occupational stress result in increasing rates of long-term illness and absence from work. Occupational NCDs include occupational cancer, chronic bronchitis and asthma caused by air pollution in the workplace and radiation. Despite these diseases, in the majority of countries physicians and nurses are not adequately trained to address work-related health problems and many countries do not offer postgraduate education in occupational health.
Work-related health problems result in an economic loss of 4–6% of GDP for most countries. About 70% of workers do not have any insurance to compensate them in case of occupational diseases and injuries.
Universal health coverage combines access to services needed to achieve good health (health promotion, prevention, treatment and rehabilitation, including those that address health determinants) with the financial protection that prevents ill health leading to poverty. There are effective interventions to prevent occupational diseases. For example encapsulation of pollution sources, ventilation, noise control, substitution of dangerous chemicals, improvement of furniture and the organization of work. The task of specialized occupational health services is to assess these risks and develop recommendations for prevention of occupational and work-related diseases. Workers at risk need regular medical check-ups to detect any health problem at an early stage, when treatment and modification of the workplace can help avoid permanent damage. Currently, specialized occupational health services are available only for 15% of workers across the world, primarily in big companies that offer health insurance and employment injury benefits. With the ongoing global job crisis, more and more people seek labour in the informal sector without any insurance cover and no occupational health services. Many such workers often also work in hazardous conditions and suffer work-related diseases, injuries and disabilities. In many communities, when the breadwinner falls sick the entire family suffers as there is no social protection. Primary care centres can deliver some basic occupational services for workers in the informal sector and in small enterprises in the community. Most often they carry out workplace visits with recommendations for improvement, and conduct preliminary and periodic medical examinations, diagnosis and reporting of occupational and work-related diseases. Primary care centres could also train and work with health volunteers and workplace safety representatives to implement simple measures for the prevention of occupational diseases and provide advice on safer working methods. The costs of these services varies between US$ 18 and US$ 60 per worker. Their benefits would include: Research has demonstrated that workplace health initiatives can help reduce sick leave absenteeism by 27% and health-care costs for companies by 26%.
World Health Assembly resolution WHA60.26, “Workers’ Health: Global Plan of Action”, urged Member States “to work towards full coverage of all workers, particularly those in the informal sector, agriculture, small enterprises and migrant workers with essential interventions and basic occupational health services for primary prevention of occupational and work-related diseases and injuries.” WHO’s proposed strategy to improve health coverage of workers including those working in small companies and the informal sector is to work with countries in the following strategic directions.
Related
News
Fact sheets
Documents

========================================
quality-health-services
========================================
Quality of care is the degree to which health services for individuals and populations increase the likelihood of desired health outcomes and are consistent with evidence-based professional knowledge. This definition of quality of care spans promotion, prevention, treatment, rehabilitation and palliation, and implies that quality of care can be measured and continuously improved through the provision of evidence-based care that takes into consideration the needs and preferences of health service users – patients, families and communities.
Quality health services should be:
The overarching aim of UHC is for all people who need health services to receive high- quality care without financial hardship. Quality health services is thus embedded within the definition of UHC. Even with increased access to services, health improvements can remain elusive unless those services are of sufficient quality to be effective (5).
Quality health services are a product of the health system’s environment and the actions of health care providers and individuals working within the system. To achieve the goal of access to high quality health services for all, governments should take an integrated approach and work with different key actors within the health system and beyond, including individuals and communities. The success and sustainability of efforts to improve quality of care is dependent on effective integration of health actions and programmes across different levels of the health system.
National strategic direction on quality: National policies and strategies aimed at improving quality of care are essential to ensure action across the health system and need to be closely aligned with broader national health policy and planning. The national quality policy and strategy identifies a pragmatic package of interventions to strengthen the system environment, reduce harm, improve clinical care, and engage patients, families and communities. An illustrative list of interventions for each of these areas is available for countries to consider.
Quality across the health system: In addition to an enabling policy environment, the provision of quality health services requires good governance; skilled and competent health workforce that is supported and motivated; financing mechanisms that enable and encourage quality care; information systems that continuously monitor and learn to drive better care; medicines, medical devices and technologies that are available, safe and appropriately regulated; and accessible and well-equipped health care facilities. Quality-driven primary health care approach: Primary health care is pivotal for building a high quality health system and achieving universal health coverage. Careful consideration is needed to ensure PHC-oriented health systems deliver effective, safe and user-centred health services. PHC can not only improve quality from the perspective of people but also enhance their trust in the health system. Monitoring and evaluation: Quality of care needs to be continually measured to monitor progress towards improvement goals. This requires context-specific indicators and accurate, timely and actionable data. The integration of global and national measurement efforts is critical to ensuring that countries collect data that matters and use that data to transform and improve their service delivery systems. The role, for instance, of adverse event reporting and learning systems is critical in this context. Data-driven response and learning systems: It is critical to document and share on-the-ground experiences related to quality of care efforts. This is key to understand the realities of the health system, what works and what doesn’t work. Such knowledge, emerging from implementation experiences must be shared globally and within the countries. Engaging users and communities: To improve quality of care, health systems need to listen to and learn from the population they serve. Understanding people’s views can provide valuable insights on what is important for them. Robust and regular dialogue between governments and their population fosters trust as people feel that the policy-makers listen to their needs and interests and consider their perspectives (6).
WHO works with Member States and partners to ensure that quality of health services is addressed at the national level and operational plans are in place to improve quality of care at national, sub-national and facility level. Specifically, WHO:
References
Related
Integrated Health Services
WHO's work on quality of care
Quality health services
Patient safety
Integrated Health Services Hub
WHO's work on infection prevention and control
WHO's work on water, sanitation and hygiene
News
Fact sheets

========================================
rabies
========================================
Rabies is a vaccine-preventable, zoonotic, viral disease affecting the central nervous system. In up to 99% of the human rabies cases, dogs are responsible for virus transmission. Children between the age of 5 and 14 years are frequent victims. Rabies infects mammals, including dogs, cats, livestock and wildlife.
Rabies spreads to people and animals via saliva, usually through bites, scratches, or direct contact with mucosa . Once clinical symptoms appear, rabies is virtually 100% fatal. The global cost of rabies is estimated to be around US$ 8.6 billion per year including lost lives and livelihoods, medical care and associated costs, as well as uncalculated psychological trauma. Rabies is present on all continents except Antarctica. Globally there are an estimated 59 000 deaths from rabies annually; however, due to underreporting, documented case numbers often differ from the estimate. Rabies, a neglected tropical diseases , predominantly affecting marginalized populations. Although effective human vaccines and immunoglobulins exist for rabies, these are often inaccessible or unaffordable to those in need. As of 2018, the average estimated cost of rabies post-exposure prophylaxis was US$ 108 , which can be a financial burden on those earning US$ 1–2 per person, daily. Over 29 million people worldwide receive human rabies vaccine annually. In the Americas, where dog-mediated rabies is mostly controlled, hematophagous bats are now the primary source of human rabies. Bat-mediated rabies is also an emerging public health threat in Australia and parts of western Europe. Human deaths following exposure to foxes, raccoons, skunks, and other wild mammals are very rare, and bites from rodents are not known to transmit rabies.
Contraction of rabies through inhalation of virus-containing aerosols, consumption of raw meat or milk of infected animals, or through organ transplantation is extremely rare. Human-to-human transmission through bites or saliva is theoretically possible but has never been confirmed. The incubation period for rabies is typically 2–3 months but may vary from one week to one year, depending on factors such as the location of virus entry and the viral load. Initial symptoms of rabies include generic signs like fever, pain and unusual or unexplained tingling, pricking, or burning sensations at the wound site. As the virus moves to the central nervous system, progressive and fatal inflammation of the brain and spinal cord develops. Clinical rabies in people can be managed but very rarely cured, and not without severe neurological deficits. There are two forms of rabies:
Currently there are no WHO-approved diagnostic tools for detecting rabies infection before the onset of clinical disease. Clinical diagnosis of rabies is difficult without a reliable history of contact with a rabid animal or specific symptoms of hydrophobia or aerophobia. Accurate risk assessment is crucial for deciding on PEP administration. Once symptoms emerge, and death is inevitable, offering comprehensive and compassionate palliative care is recommended.
Postmortem confirmation of rabies infection is done by various diagnostic techniques that detect whole viruses, viral antigens, or nucleic acids in infected tissues . Where possible, the biting animal should be tested. Vaccinating dogs, including puppies, through mass dog vaccination programs is the most cost-effective strategy for preventing rabies in people because it stops the transmission at its source. Culling free roaming dogs is not effective in controlling rabies.
Public education for both children and adults on dog behaviour and bite prevention, what to do if bitten or scratched by a potentially rabid animal, and responsible pet ownership are essential extensions of rabies vaccination programmes. Effective vaccines are available to immunize people both before and after potential exposures. As listed under the WHO - Prequalification of Medical Products, as of 2024, there are only 3 WHO pre-qualified human rabies vaccines available globally: RABIVAX-S by Serum Institute of India Pvt. Ltd., VaxiRab N by Zydus Lifesciences Limited, and VERORAB by Sanofi Pasteur.
Pre-exposure prophylaxis is recommended for people in high-risk occupations and people whose professional or personal activities might lead to direct contact with infected animals .
PrEP might be indicated before recreation or travel in some areas, and for people living in remote, highly rabies-endemic areas with limited local access to rabies biologicals. Note that PrEP does not replace the need for PEP. Any person exposed to a suspected rabid animal should still seek post exposure care. Post-exposure prophylaxis is the emergency response to a rabies exposure. This prevents the virus from entering the central nervous system. A well performed wound risk assessment and PEP protocol consists of:
Depending on the severity of exposure, administration of a full PEP course is recommended as follows:
NB: Category II and III exposures require human rabies vaccination.
WHO recommends that all human rabies vaccines comply with WHO standards. Deployment of poor-quality rabies vaccines has led to public health failures in several countries.
As detailed in the guidance on PEP administration, WHO recommends moving from intramuscular (IM) to intradermal (ID) administration of human rabies vaccines. Intradermal administration reduces the amount of necessary vaccine and number of doses, therefore reducing costs by 60–80%, without compromising safety or efficacy. Fewer doses also promote patient compliance with the recommended regimen. Rabies is included in WHO’s 2021–2030 Roadmap for the global control of NTDs, which sets regional, progressive targets for the global strategic plan to end human deaths from dog-mediated rabies by 2030 . This entails: Related
News
More
Zero by 30: Global Strategic PlanOpen WHO course – One HealthRabies vaccines: WHO position paperWHO Guide to introducing human rabies vaccine into national immunization programmesWHO Expert Consultation on Rabies

========================================
radon
========================================
Radon is a radioactive gas that has no smell, colour or taste. Radon is produced from the natural radioactive decay of uranium, which is found in all rocks and soils. Radon can also be found in water.
Radon escapes from the ground into the air, where it decays and produces further radioactive particles. As we breathe, these particles are deposited on the cells lining the airways, where they can damage DNA and potentially cause lung cancer.
Outdoors, radon quickly dilutes to very low concentrations and is generally not a problem. The average outdoor radon level (1) varies from 5 Bq/m3 to 15 Bq/m3. However, radon concentrations are higher indoors and in areas with minimal ventilation, with highest levels found in places like mines, caves and water treatment facilities. In buildings such as homes, schools, offices, radon levels can vary substantially from 10 Bq/m3 to more than 10 000 Bq/m3. Given the properties of radon, occupants of such buildings could unknowingly be living or working in very high radon levels. Radon is a major cause of lung cancer. It is estimated that radon causes between 3% to 14% of all lung cancers in a country, depending on the national average radon level and the smoking prevalence.
An increased rate of lung cancer was first seen in uranium miners exposed to very high concentrations of radon. In addition, studies in Europe, North America and China have confirmed that even low concentrations of radon – such as those commonly found in residential settings – also pose health risks and contribute to the occurrence of lung cancers worldwide.
The risk of lung cancer increases by about 16% per 100 Bq/m3 increase in long time average radon concentration. The dose-response relation is assumed to be linear – i.e. the risk of lung cancer increases proportionally with increasing radon exposure.
Radon is much more likely to cause lung cancer in people who smoke. In fact, smokers are estimated to be 25 times more at risk from radon than non-smokers. No other cancer risks or other health effects have been established to date, although inhaled radon can deliver radiation to other organs, but at a much lower level than to the lungs.
For most people, the greatest exposure to radon occurs in the home where people spend much of their time, though indoor workplaces may also be a source of exposure. The concentration of radon in buildings depends on:
Radon enters buildings through cracks in the floors or at floor-wall junctions, gaps around pipes or cables, small pores in hollow-block walls, cavity walls, or sumps or drains. Radon levels are usually higher in basements, cellars and living spaces in contact with the ground. However, considerable radon concentration can also be found above the ground floor.
Radon concentrations vary considerably between adjacent buildings, as well as within a building from day to day and from hour to hour. Because of these fluctuations, it is preferable to estimate the annual mean concentration of radon in indoor air by measurements for at least 3 months. Residential radon levels can be measured in an inexpensive and simple manner by means of small passive detectors. Measurements need to be based on national protocols to ensure consistency as well as reliability for decision-making. Short-term radon tests, done in compliance with national protocols, can be valuable when making decisions during time-sensitive situations, such as home sales or to test the effectiveness of radon mitigation work.
Well-tested, durable and cost-efficient methods exist for preventing radon in new buildings and reducing radon in existing dwellings. Radon prevention should be considered when new structures are built, particularly in radon-prone areas. In many countries of Europe, and in the United States of America and China, the inclusion of protective measures in new buildings are included in building codes.
Some common ways of reducing radon levels in existing buildings include:
Passive systems of mitigation can reduce indoor radon levels by more than 50%. When radon ventilation fans are added radon, levels can be reduced even further.
In many countries, drinking water is obtained from groundwater sources such as springs, wells and boreholes. These sources of water normally have higher concentrations of radon than surface water from reservoirs, rivers or lakes.
To date, epidemiological studies have not confirmed an association between consumption of drinking-water containing radon and an increased risk of stomach cancer. Radon dissolved in drinking-water is released into indoor air. Normally, a higher radon dose is received from inhaling radon compared with ingestion.
The WHO guidelines for drinking water quality (2) recommend that screening levels for radon in drinking-water be set based on the national reference level for radon in air. In circumstances where high radon concentrations might be expected in drinking-water, it is prudent to measure radon concentrations. Straightforward and effective techniques exist to reduce the concentration of radon in drinking-water supplies by aeration or using granular activated carbon filters. Further guidance is available in Management of radioactivity in drinking-water (3) .
Indoor radon is a preventable risk factor that can be handled through effective national policies and regulations. The WHO handbook on indoor radon: A public health perspective (4) provides policy options for reducing health risks from residential radon exposure through:
These recommendations are consistent with the International Basic Safety Standards (5) , co-sponsored by WHO and other international organizations. WHO promotes the implementation of these radon standards, which ultimately support the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development Goals , and Target 3.4 on noncommunicable diseases. To help monitor national radon policies and regulations around the world, WHO has assembled a radon database (6) as part of the WHO Global Health Observatory.
1. Radioactivity is measured in units called Becquerels (Bq). One Becquerel corresponds to the transformation of one atomic nucleus per second. Radon concentration in air is measured by the number of transformations per second in a cubic meter of air .
2. Guidelines for drinking-water quality, 4th edition, Geneva, WHO 3. Management of radioactivity in drinking-water, Geneva, WHO 4. WHO Handbook on Indoor Radon: A Public Health Perspective, Geneva, WHO 5. Radiation Protection and Safety of Radiation Sources: International Basic Safety Standards, Vienna, IAEA 6. WHO Global Health Observatory: Radon database on national policies and regulations
Related
More
WHO's work on radonRadon webpageWHO Global Health Observatory: Radon database on national policies and regulationsNational Radon SurveyRadiation health topic

========================================
refugee-and-migrant-health
========================================
Refugees and migrants have a variety of different physical and mental health needs, shaped by experiences in their country of origin, their migration journey, their host country’s entry and integration policies, and living and working conditions. These experiences can increase the vulnerability of refugees and migrants to chronic and infectious diseases.
The COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted health services, putting people already in vulnerable situations at heightened risk and hampering the ability of health systems to respond to their needs.
The term refugee is defined in Article 1 of the 1951 Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees (3). There is no universally accepted definition of the term migrant (4). However, the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs defines an international migrant as “any person who changes his or her country of usual residence”, and this definition includes people who are moving or have moved across an international border, regardless of legal status, duration of the stay abroad and causes for migration (5).
Migrants may be given a migration status that limits their entitlement and access to health care. However, international law guarantees universal access in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, in particular with Sustainable Development Goal 3 (6).
Although governed by separate legal frameworks, refugees and migrants are entitled to the same universal human rights and fundamental freedoms as other people (7).
In 2021, countries with the highest number of refugees fleeing were 1. Syrian Arab Republic, 2. Venezuela, 3. Afghanistan, 4. South Sudan and 5. Myanmar while countries hosting the highest number of refugees were 1. Turkey, 2. Colombia, 3. Uganda, 4. Pakistan, 5. Germany (8).
In the first 5 weeks since the escalation of conflict in Ukraine on 24 February 2022, more than 4 million refugees from Ukraine crossed borders into neighbouring countries, and many more have been forced to move inside the country (9).
In 2020, the top countries of origin for international migrants were 1. India, 2. Mexico, 3. Russian Federation, 4. Syrian Arab Republic, 5. China. The United States of America has been the main country of destination for international migrants since 1970, and Germany is the second top destination (10).
Refugees and migrants are a diverse group and have a variety of health needs, which may differ from those of the host populations.
Refugees and migrants often come from communities affected by war, conflict, natural disasters, environmental degradation or economic crisis. They undertake long, exhausting journeys with inadequate access to food and water, sanitation and other basic services, which increases their risk of communicable diseases, particularly measles, and food- and waterborne diseases. They may also be at risk of accidental injuries, hypothermia, burns, unwanted pregnancy and delivery-related complications, and various noncommunicable diseases due to the migration experience, restrictive entry and integration policies and exclusion.
Refugees and migrants may arrive in the country of destination with poorly controlled non-communicable diseases, as they did not have care on the journey. Maternity care is usually a first point of contact with health systems for female refugees and migrants. Refugees and migrants may also be at risk of poor mental health because of traumatic or stressful experiences Many of them experience feelings of anxiety and sadness, hopelessness, difficulty sleeping, fatigue, irritability, anger or aches and pains but for most people these symptoms of distress improve over time They may be at more risk of such as depression, anxiety and post-traumatic stress disorder than the host populations.
Refugees and migrants remain among the most vulnerable members of society and are often faced with xenophobia; discrimination; substandard living, housing and working conditions; and inadequate or restricted access to mainstream health services.
Migrants, particularly in an irregular situation, are often excluded from national programmes for health promotion, disease prevention, treatment and care, as well as from financial protection in health. They can also face high user fees, low levels of health literacy, poor cultural competency among health providers, stigma and inadequate interpreting services. Barriers are even greater for people with disabilities. Women and girls may find difficulty in accessing sexual and gender-based violence protection and response services. Refugee and migrant children, especially unaccompanied minors, are more likely to experience traumatic events and stressful situations, such as exploitation and abuse, and may struggle to access health care.
The COVID-19 pandemic has brought an increased risk of infection and death for refugees and migrants. People on the move may have limited tools to protect themselves such as social distancing, hand hygiene and self-isolation are often not possible.
The pandemic has highlighted existing inequities in access to and utilization of health services. Refugees and migrants have also suffered the negative economic impact of lockdown and travel restrictions. Income loss and health care insecurity may have particularly affected labour migrants. They may have also experienced legal and social insecurity caused by the postponement of decisions on migration status or a reduction of employment, legal and administrative services.
WHO believes that everyone, including refugees and migrants, should be able to enjoy the right to health and access to people-centred, high-quality health services without financial impediment, as expressed by our commitment to universal health coverage. Health systems should incorporate the needs of refugees and migrants in national and local health policies, financing, planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation. In rapid and effective emergency responses, health care may sometimes need to be delivered in a parallel structure to the national health system, but in the long term, refugee and migrant health should be mainstreamed into existing services.
WHO works around the world to secure the health rights of refugees and migrants and achieve universal health coverage. Through the Health and Migration Programme, and in collaboration with regional and country offices, WHO provides global leadership, advocacy, coordination and policy on health and migration; sets norms and standards to support decision-making; monitors trends, strengthens health information systems and promotes tools and strategies; provides technical assistance, response and capacity-building support to address public health challenges; and promotes global multilateral action and collaboration by working with UN agencies and other international stakeholders, as well as by being part of the United Nations Network on Migration. WHO works with countries to build strong health systems that are supported by a well trained, culturally sensitive and competent workforce, and are sensitive to the needs of refugees and migrants, their languages and their unique health problems.
1. https://www.iom.int/data-and-research 2. https://www.unhcr.org/refugee-statistics/ 3. http://www.unhcr.org/3b66c2aa10.pdf 4. https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/promoting-the-health-of-refugees-and-migrants-draft-global-action-plan-2019–2023 5. Recommendations on Statistics of International Migration, Revision 1 para. 32). https://unstats.un.org/unsd/publication/seriesm/seriesm_58rev1e.pdf 6. https://documents-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N15/291/89/PDF/N1529189.pdf?OpenElement
7. United Nations General Assembly resolution 71/1 . New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants, paragraph 6 8. https://www.unhcr.org/refugee-statistics/ 9. https://data2.unhcr.org/en/situations/ukraine
10. Interactive World Migration Report 2022 Related
News
Fact sheets
Feature stories
More
Health emergenciesAfghanistan crisisCoronavirus pandemicCrisis in Northern EthiopiaIraq crisisNigeria crisisSomalia crisis South Sudan crisisSyria crisisUkraine emergencyYemen crisis
Health emergencies
Afghanistan crisisCoronavirus pandemic
Crisis in Northern Ethiopia
Iraq crisis
Nigeria crisis
Somalia crisis South Sudan crisis
Syria crisis
Ukraine emergency
Yemen crisis

========================================
refugee-and-migrant-mental-health
========================================
Today more people than ever live in a country other than the one where they were born. While many people migrate out of choice, others migrate out of necessity. Some may be forcibly displaced from their homes as they flee persecution, conflict, violence or disaster. Others facing adversity may also have little option but to move, for example to escape inhuman treatment, avoid economic hardship, access social rights or reunite with families. Refugees and migrants exposed to adversity have diverse mental health needs, shaped by experiences in their country of origin, their migration journey, their host country’s entry and integration policies, and living and working conditions. In some contexts, they may be at greater risk of experiencing mental health conditions than their host population. Refugees and migrants face significant barriers that hamper inclusion in society and limit the accessibility and acceptability of mental health services. Addressing these typically requires targeted, multi-disciplinary action, including culturally sensitive and integrated mental health care, social support, legal assistance and community engagement.
The experience of migration is a key determinant of refugee and migrant mental health. Each stage of the migration journey presents unique stressors that can increase the risk of developing mental health conditions.
In all contexts, and at all stages of the migration journey, refugee and migrant mental health is influenced by diverse individual, family, community and structural factors that can be grouped into five areas. Many refugees and migrants experience distress, such as feelings of anxiety, sadness, hopelessness, difficulty sleeping, fatigue, irritability, anger and physical pains. For most people, these reactions improve over time. Others will go on to develop mental health conditions.
Studies show that mental health conditions such as depression, anxiety, PTSD and suicide are more prevalent among refugees and migrants than host populations. In several countries, the incidence of psychoses is also higher among migrants, linked to cumulative social disadvantages throughout the migration journey. WHO uses its three strategic approaches to support Member States in including refugees and migrants in national health systems and ensuring their access to mental health services as part of their journey towards universal health coverage. Leadership and advocacy. WHO’s Global Action Plan is designed to promote the health of refugees and migrants through concerted international action and cooperation. The updated Comprehensive Mental Health Action Plan focuses specifically on promoting mental well-being, and reducing the impact of mental health conditions. It emphasizes the need to address disparities in access to care and improve support for at-risk groups, including refugees and migrants. Through the Global Compact on Refugees Multistakeholder pledge, WHO is committed to integrating mental health and psychosocial support in humanitarian, development and peace-building programmes. WHO also co-chairs the Inter-Agency Standing Committee Reference Group on Mental Health and Psychosocial Support in Emergency Settings, helping to ensure coordinated mental health responses in emergencies. Norms, standards and data. WHO’s 2023 Global Evidence Review on Health and Migration focused on the mental health needs of refugees and migrants, identifying major risks and protective factors and making key research and policy recommendations. With partners, WHO has also published a range of practical tools and guidelines to meet the mental health needs of people affected by emergencies, including refugees and migrants. These are used by most large international humanitarian organizations active in mental health. Country support. Working with partners such as the International Organization for Migration and The UN Refugee Agency , WHO supports mental health in diverse countries and territories hosting large numbers of refugees and migrants, including Chad, Colombia, Ethiopia, Jordan, Lebanon, Sudan, Türkiye and Uganda. References
Related
Mental health and psychosocial support in emergenciesWHO's work on refugee and migrant healthWHO's work on mental health PublicationsmhGAP Intervention Guide For Mental, Neurological And Substance Use Disorders In Non-Specialized Health Settings. Version 2.0. mhGAP Humanitarian Intervention Guide . Clinical management of mental, neurological, and substance use conditions in humanitarian emergencies Mental health of refugees and migrants: risk and protective factors and access to careWHO global action plan on promoting the health of refugees and migrants, 2019–2030Dementia in refugees and migrants: epidemiology, public health implications and global responses
mhGAP Intervention Guide For Mental, Neurological And Substance Use Disorders In Non-Specialized Health Settings. Version 2.0. mhGAP Humanitarian Intervention Guide . Clinical management of mental, neurological, and substance use conditions in humanitarian emergencies Mental health of refugees and migrants: risk and protective factors and access to care
WHO global action plan on promoting the health of refugees and migrants, 2019–2030
Dementia in refugees and migrants: epidemiology, public health implications and global responses
News
Fact sheets
Commentaries

========================================
rehabilitation
========================================
Rehabilitation is defined as “a set of interventions designed to optimize functioning and reduce disability in individuals with health conditions in interaction with their environment”.
Put simply, rehabilitation helps a child, adult or older person to be as independent as possible in everyday activities and enables participation in education, work, recreation and meaningful life roles such as taking care of family. It does so by working with the person and their family to address underlying health conditions and their symptoms, modifying their environment to better suit their needs, using assistive products, educating to strengthen self-management, and adapting tasks so that they can be performed more safely and independently. Together, these strategies can help an individual; overcome difficulties with thinking, seeing, hearing, communicating, eating or moving around.
Anybody may need rehabilitation at some point in their lives, following an injury, surgery, disease or illness, or because their functioning has declined with age.
Some examples of rehabilitation include:
Rehabilitation is highly person-centred, meaning that the interventions selected for each individual are targeted to their goals and preferences. Rehabilitation can be provided in many different places, such as inpatient or outpatient hospital settings, outpatient physio- or occupational therapy practices, and community settings such as an individual’s home, a school or a workplace.
The rehabilitation workforce is made up of different health workers, including but not limited to physiotherapists, occupational therapists, speech and language therapists and audiologists, orthotists and prosthetists, clinical psychologists, physical medicine and rehabilitation doctors, and rehabilitation nurses. Many other health workers, such as general practitioners, surgeons, and community health workers may also play an important role in a person’s rehabilitation.
Rehabilitation can reduce the impact of a broad range of health conditions, including diseases , illnesses or injuries. It complements other health interventions, such as medical and surgical interventions, helping to facilitate recovery and achieve the best outcome possible. In addition, rehabilitation can help to prevent, reduce or manage complications associated with many health conditions, such as in the context of spinal cord injury, stroke, or fractures.
Rehabilitation helps to minimize or slow down the disabling effects of chronic health conditions, such as cardiovascular disease, cancer and diabetes by equipping people with self-management strategies and the assistive products they require, or by addressing pain or other complications. As such, it contributes to healthy ageing.
Rehabilitation is an investment, with cost benefits for both the individuals and society. It can help to avoid costly hospitalization, reduce hospital length of stay, and prevent re-admissions. As rehabilitation also enables individuals to engage in or return to work and employment, or to remain independent at home, it minimizes the need for financial or caregiver support.
Rehabilitation is an important part of universal health coverage and is a key strategy for achieving Sustainable Development Goal 3 – “Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages”.
Rehabilitation is not only for people with disabilities or long-term or physical impairments. Rather, rehabilitation is an essential health service for anyone with an acute or chronic health condition, impairment or injury that limits functioning, and as such should be available for anyone who needs it.
Rehabilitation is not a luxury health service that is available only for those who can afford it. Nor is it an optional service to try only when other interventions to prevent or cure a health condition fail.
For the full extent of the social, economic and health benefits of rehabilitation to be realized, timely, high quality and affordable rehabilitation interventions should be available to all. In many cases, this means starting rehabilitation as soon as a health condition is noted and continuing to deliver rehabilitation alongside other health interventions. Globally, about 2.4 billion people are currently living with a health condition that may benefit from rehabilitation. With changes taking place in the health and characteristics of the population worldwide, this estimated need for rehabilitation is only going to increase in the coming years. People are living longer, with the number of people over 60 years of age predicted to double by 2050, and more people are living with chronic diseases such as diabetes, stroke and cancer. At the same time, the ongoing incidence of injury and child developmental conditions persist. These health conditions can impact an individual’s functioning and are linked to increased levels of disability, for which rehabilitation can be beneficial.
In many parts of the world, this increasing need for rehabilitation is going largely unmet. More than half of people living in some low- and middle-income countries who require rehabilitation services do not receive them.
Global rehabilitation needs continue to be unmet due to multiple factors, including:
Natural hazards such as earthquakes or disease outbreaks and human induced hazards including conflict, terrorism or industrial accidents can generate overwhelming rehabilitation needs as a result of injury or illness. They also simultaneously disrupt existing services and have the greatest impact on the most vulnerable populations and the weakest health systems.
While the important role of rehabilitation in emergencies is recognized in clinical and humanitarian guidelines, it is rarely considered as part of health system preparedness and early response. The result is that pre-existing limitations in rehabilitation services are magnified, health service delivery is less efficient, and people directly affected are at risk of increased impairment and disability.
A health system strengthening approach is needed to ensure that rehabilitation services can reach all who need them. This involves making rehabilitation part of all levels of care, including primary care, and ensuring it is incorporated as part of universal health coverage.
WHO’s work is guided by the resolution on Strengthening rehabilitation in health systems adopted at the Seventy-sixth World Health Assembly implemented through the Rehabilitation 2030 initiative as requested by the resolution. WHO’s work focuses on providing technical support to Member States in the areas of:
WHO is also working to strengthen rehabilitation advocacy, through the World Rehabilitation Alliance.
Related
Related links News
Fact sheets
Feature stories

========================================
respiratory-syncytial-virus-(rsv)
========================================
Respiratory syncytial virus is an RNA virus that belongs to the Pneumoviridae family along with the human metapneumovirus and consists in two genotypes (1). RSV is specific and pathogenic for humans and infects cells along the human respiratory tract, from the nose to the lungs. RSV causes a wide spectrum of respiratory disease, from mild upper respiratory tract infections to life threatening lower respiratory tract infections (2). Infants, especially those under six months of age, are at highest risk of severe RSV disease and death. RSV can also cause severe disease among elderly people and those with underlying illnesses. Until recently, there was no vaccine available to protect infants and elderly people from RSV disease. In the last few years, several vaccines and a long-acting monoclonal antibody have been licensed and are starting to be used to prevent severe RSV disease in these high-risk populations.
Each year, RSV causes an estimated 3.6 million RSV-associated hospitalizations and approximatively 100 000 RSV-attributable deaths in children under 5 years of age worldwide (3). Approximately half of RSV deaths among children occur in infants under the age of 6 months. Most paediatric RSV deaths occur in low- and middle-income countries where there is limited access to supportive medical care (3). The global estimates of adult RSV disease are not known; in the United States of America, it has been estimated that RSV results in up to 160 000 hospitalizations and 10 000 deaths among adults over 65 years of age. The hospitalization rate for adults infected with RSV is higher among individuals with underlying conditions like asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, or congestive heart failure (4).
Most countries demonstrate RSV seasonality, with most annual RSV infections occurring over a several month period (5). In temperate climates, RSV causes seasonal epidemics, tending to occur in late fall and winter, with an average duration of elevated viral circulation of five months. Although not as sharply defined, most sub-tropical and tropical countries also experience consistent months of high RSV circulation during each year but with no clear seasonality patterns .
RSV is transmitted via infectious respiratory particles through the air from an infected person to another one. The virus is also thought to be transmitted by direct contact with infected persons or through support contaminated with the virus. Almost all babies are infected by RSV by their second birthday. Most have mild illness, but some can get very sick. Older children and adults are often re-infected with RSV, but usually have mild illness, except for elderly persons and those with significant underlying illnesses who can have severe illness and even die.
The first symptoms of RSV usually present between day 4–7 after exposure to the virus (2). Signs and symptoms of upper respiratory illness include: It is to be noted that although most children may present with fever during RSV infection, a certain proportion of young children may not.
Signs and symptoms consistent with lower respiratory tract infection include: Severe lung disease can result in low oxygen levels in the body, respiratory muscle fatigue and can sometimes result in death. RSV-LRTI in early life may lead to long-term respiratory consequences, including repeat hospitalizations for respiratory illness during infancy, recurrent wheeze and/or asthma, and impaired lung health beyond infancy (2).
RSV infection in elderly adults can exacerbate chronic underlying illnesses, such as lung and heart disease (4).
There is no specific treatment for RSV. Management of severe RSV disease involves supportive care, such as nasal suction of secretions, intravenous fluids for hydration, and most importantly supplemental oxygen to help breathing (2). Several immunization products are currently available to prevent severe RSV disease in infants and elderly adults (7). To protect infants, there is a vaccine given to pregnant women and persons late in pregnancy . Maternal immunization allows transfer of antibodies against RSV through the placenta to the unborn baby, who is then protected for approximately 6 months after birth.
Another immunization product to protect babies is a long-acting monoclonal antibody that targets the RSV virus. It is given as an intramuscular injection to protect against severe RSV lower respiratory tract infection lung disease during RSV infection. This product can be administrated to all neonates and infants entering their first RSV season. In addition, countries could consider administering monoclonal antibody to young children with high risk of severe RSV disease entering their second RSV season.
Currently, the cost of these products is high, and they are not affordable to most low- and middle-income countries. Also, there is under-recognition of RSV as a cause of severe lung disease in these countries, who face many other health priorities. Therefore, there is a delay in introducing these potential life-saving interventions for RSV prevention into the countries where they are most needed.
In 2015, the WHO Global Influenza Programme launched the global RSV surveillance project using the existing WHO influenza platform Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System . This project aims to enhance recognition of RSV among infants and young children, focusing on severe disease requiring hospitalization, expanding virologic monitoring to differentiate virus types, and generating a better understanding of the seasonality, age groups at risk and disease burden among young children, particularly in low- and middle-income countries in all WHO regions.
Considering the worldwide impact of RSV disease, the Strategic Group of Experts on Immunization and WHO, advised that every country should adopt measures to prevent severe RSV in infants. When deciding to use maternal vaccination and/or monoclonal antibodies, factors such as cost, funding, supply, expected coverage and the practicality of integrating these measures into the current health-care system should be taken into account. WHO is working with partners to make these products available in low- and middle-income countries. In the future WHO will issue recommendations on vaccines to prevent severe RSV disease in elderly adults.
References
Fact sheets
More
WHO's work on respiratory syncytial virus Human metapneumovirus infection - Questions and answersRespiratory syncytial virus disease Respiratory syncytial virus surveillanceRSV: WHO Immunization, Vaccines and Biologicals DepartmentPrequalified RSV vaccines

========================================
rheumatic-heart-disease
========================================
Rheumatic heart disease is a serious yet preventable public health problem. The disease starts as a sore throat and/or skin infections caused by a bacterium called Streptococcus pyogenes which can pass easily from person to person in the same way as other upper respiratory tract infections. Strep infections are most common in childhood. In some people, this streptococcal infection causes the immune system to react against the tissues of the body including inflaming and scarring the heart valves. This is referred to as rheumatic fever. Rheumatic heart disease results from the inflammation and scarring of heart valves caused by rheumatic fever.
Rheumatic fever mostly affects children and adolescents in low- and middle-income countries and in marginalized communities, including Indigenous populations, especially where poverty is widespread and access to health services is limited. People who live in overcrowded and poor living conditions are at greatest risk of developing the disease.
Where rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease are endemic, rheumatic heart disease is the principal heart disease seen in pregnant women, causing significant maternal and perinatal morbidity and mortality. Pregnant women with rheumatic heart disease are at risk of adverse outcomes, including heart arrythmias and heart failure due to increased blood volume putting more pressure on the heart valves. It is not uncommon for women to be unaware that they have rheumatic heart disease until pregnancy.
Despite it being eradicated in many parts of the world, the disease remains prevalent in sub-Saharan Africa, the Middle East, central and south Asia, the south Pacific, and among immigrants and older adults in high-income countries, especially Indigenous peoples.
Rheumatic fever symptoms can include:
Symptoms of heart valve damage that is associated with rheumatic heart disease may include:
There is no cure for rheumatic heart disease and the damage to the heart valves is permanent. Patients with severe rheumatic heart disease will often require surgery to replace or repair the damaged valve or valves. Depending on the severity of disease, medication may also be needed to treat symptoms of heart failure or heart rhythm abnormalities. Medications which thin the blood to reduce the risk of blood clots may also be needed. In the case of serious disease surgery may be required to repair or replace the heart valves. This is often not available in low-income settings, or when it is available the costs may be too high if not covered as part of national health plans, putting families under increased financial strain.
Since rheumatic heart disease results from rheumatic fever, an important strategy is to prevent rheumatic fever from occurring. Treatment of strep throat with appropriate antibiotics will prevent rheumatic fever. Once a patient has been identified as having had rheumatic fever, it is important to prevent additional streptococcal infections as this could cause a further episode of rheumatic fever and additional damage to the heart valves. The strategy to prevent additional streptococcal infection is to treat the patient with antibiotics over a long period of time. The antibiotic treatment that is most effective in preventing further infection is benzathine penicillin G, which is given by intramuscular injection every 3–4 weeks over many years.
For countries where rheumatic heart disease is endemic, the main strategies for prevention, control and elimination include Rheumatic heart disease can be prevented by effective management of streptococcal sore throat; however, treatment at this early stage is often not achieved. Families may not have the time or money to access a health-care facility, or may not seek care due to low awareness of the potential risk of untreated strep throat. Health-care workers may also not have the necessary knowledge to appropriately diagnose and manage strep throat. If left untreated, rheumatic fever may then ensue.
Currently a large proportion of those suffering rheumatic heart disease are not diagnosed or are diagnosed at a late stage when damage to the heart is very severe. Rheumatic heart disease remains the leading cause of maternal cardiac complications in pregnancy. In many rheumatic heart disease-endemic countries there is little or no access to life-saving heart valve surgery. Measures to halt the progression to severe rheumatic heart disease require long-term treatments and a well-functioning health system to deliver this service. Additionally, because treatment is long-term, it can be costly and challenging for patients to regularly visit a health-care facility, and some patients may avoid the injections due to discomfort or fear of adverse events.
A steady supply of benzathine penicillin G is an essential prerequisite for treatment of sore throat and to prevent recurrent infection. However, the antibiotic is prone to global shortages. High manufacturing costs and low purchase prices have pushed some manufacturers out of the market while demand for the drug is rising. When the medication is not available on the shelf, necessary long-term treatment regimens are disrupted.
Investing in the secure supply of quality assured benzathine penicillin G will prevent the recurrence of global shortages and contribute to global efforts to increase access to quality-assured, safe, effective and affordable essential medicines as part of universal health coverage.
In 2018, the World Health Assembly adopted resolution WHA 71.14 calling for WHO to launch a coordinated global response to rheumatic heart disease and rheumatic fever. Following on this resolution, in 2024, the Organization published WHO guidelines on the prevention and diagnosis of rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease. In addition, WHO regional offices working with Member States have developed work plans to put these interventions in place to prevent rheumatic heart disease and care for people already living with it as part of WHO Package of Essential Non-Communicable Disease Interventions or PEN-PLUS in the WHO African Region. Ensuring a steady, quality supply of benzathine penicillin is also a key priority in the WHO’s Thirteenth General Programme of Work, specifically the strategic priority on universal health coverage and access to medicines, vaccines and health products. Additionally, the WHO Road map for access to medicines, vaccines and other health products 2019-2023 and the WHO Benzathine Penicillin Technical Working Group are working to address global supply and demand issues for benzathine penicillin and ensure a quality-assured, safe and effective product is available on the shelves when needed.
Related
Resolution WHA71.14

========================================
rheumatoid-arthritis
========================================
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic disease that causes inflammation around the body and commonly presents with pain in the joints.
Untreated, RA can cause severe damage to the joints and their surrounding tissue. It can lead to heart, lung or nervous system problems.
Common symptoms include chronic pain, stiffness, tenderness, heat and swelling in the joints. RA can make it hard to move and perform daily activities. The causes of rheumatoid arthritis are unknown. Risk factors include smoking, obesity and exposure to air pollution. Women and older people have a higher risk of developing RA. If diagnosed timely, symptoms and disease progression can be controlled with pharmacological treatment, and optimal functioning can be maintained through rehabilitation . In cases with severe joint damage, surgical procedures, including joint replacement, may help to restore movement or manage pain, and maintain physical function.
The typical onset of the disease occurs in adults in their sixties. Women are two-to-three times more often affected than men. The prevalence of rheumatoid arthritis is higher in industrialized countries, which may be explained by demographics , exposures to environmental toxins and lifestyle risk factors, and under-diagnosis in low-and-middle-income countries.
Rheumatoid arthritis causes inflammation and pain in one or more joints. It can happen in most joints, but it’s most common in the small joints of the hands, wrists and feet. RA is chronic and may worsen over time without treatment. It can lead to severe damage to the joint and surrounding tissue. It can also affect the heart, lung and nervous systems.
Early signs and symptoms:
The symptoms can worsen over time and spread to more joints including the knees, elbows or shoulders. RA can make it hard to perform daily activities like writing, holding objects with the hands, walking and climbing stairs.
People with RA often feel fatigue and general malaise and may experience depressive symptoms. Pain and difficulty moving can lead to problems with sexual function and intimate relationships. Trouble moving easily can cause lower physical fitness and lead to loss of independence, inability to work, reduced well-being and mental health problems. The specific causes for the disease are still unknown, but several modifiable lifestyle-associated and non-modifiable risk factors have been identified.
Several key prevention strategies have been proposed to prevent rheumatoid arthritis and control the disease progression. In particular, reducing exposure to inhaled silica, dusts and occupational risks, and lifestyle related behaviours (e.g., prevention of/stop smoking, healthy nutrition, physical activity, maintaining a normal body weight, maintaining good dental hygiene) play an important role. Some evidence also suggests breastfeeding may be protective to the mother (4).
Rheumatoid arthritis is not curable. Management of rheumatoid arthritis often involves different health workers, who contribute to a rehabilitative strategy tailored to a person’s needs and preferences. Early diagnosis and management can reduce symptoms, slow the disease and prevent disability. In some cases, the disease can go into remission.
Therapeutic approaches help to improve and maintain joint mobility and muscle strength, to reduce and cope with pain, and to increase exercise capacity and the ability to perform daily activities. Assistive technologies help people to protect their joints and to perform meaningful activities independently. Medicines to reduce inflammation, pain and swelling may include:
In severe cases, orthopaedic surgery can reduce pain and restore movement. Rehabilitation is essential to achieve the best outcomes following surgery.
It is important to keep a healthy lifestyle. Education and counselling are important to help people manage their symptoms and work-related tasks. Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic condition that impacts many aspects of life. Lifestyle changes are often needed for individuals and their families. Education and support help people with rheumatoid arthritis to develop strategies to cope with the disease. It is important to maintain a healthy lifestyle with regular physical activity and a nutritious diet. WHO is taking action to extend access to care in rheumatoid arthritis in different ways:
WHO Rehabilitation 2030 Initiative: The Package of Interventions for Rehabilitation provides information on essential interventions for rehabilitation , and human and material resources for 20 health conditions, including rheumatoid arthritis.
UN Decade of Healthy Ageing:
WHO recommends a reorientation of health and care systems to promote healthy ageing and address the diverse needs of older persons. The Integrated Care for Older People approach promotes the person-centred assessment of the older person to guide the design of personalized, health and social care, including long-term care interventions. Specific recommendations are provided to prevent the loss of locomotor and psychological capacity because of pain.
References
(1) GBD 2019: Global burden of 369 diseases and injuries in 204 countries and territories, 1990–2019: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019. https://vizhub.healthdata.org/gbd-results/.
(2) Cieza A, Causey K, Kamenow K, Wulf Hansen S, Chatterji S, Vos T. Global estimates of the need for rehabilitation based on the Global Burden of Disease study 2019: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019. Lancet. 2020 Dec 19; 396 : 2006–17.
(3) Long H, Liu Q, Yin H, Diao N, Zhang Y, Lin J et al. Prevalence trends of site-specific osteoarthritis from 1990 to 2019: Findings from the global burden of disease study 2019. Arthritis Rheumatol 2022; 74(7): 1172-83.
(4) Koller-Smith L, Mehdi AM, March L, Tooth L, Mishra GD, Thomas R. Rheumatoid arthritis is a preventable disease: 11 ways to reduce your patients' risk. Internal Medicine Journal 2022;52:711–6.
Related
Fact sheets

========================================
rift-valley-fever
========================================
Rift Valley fever is a viral zoonosis that primarily affects animals but can also infect humans. Infection can cause severe disease in both animals and humans. The disease results in significant economic losses due to death and abortion among RVF-infected livestock.
RVF virus is a member of the Phlebovirus genus. The virus was first identified in 1931 during an investigation into an epidemic among sheep in the Rift Valley of Kenya.
Since then, outbreaks have been reported in sub-Saharan Africa. In 1977 an explosive outbreak was reported in Egypt, where the RVF virus was introduced via infected livestock trade along the Nile irrigation system. In 1997–98, a major outbreak occurred in Kenya, Somalia and Tanzania following El Niño event and extensive flooding. Following infected livestock trade from the horn of Africa, RVF spread in September 2000 to Saudi Arabia and Yemen, marking the first reported occurrence of the disease outside the African continent and raising concerns that it could extend to other parts of Asia and Europe.
Several species of mosquito are able to act as vectors for transmission of the RVF virus. The dominant vector species varies between different regions, and different species can play different roles in sustaining the transmission of the virus.
Among animals, the RVF virus is spread primarily by the bite of infected mosquitoes, mainly the Aedes species, which can acquire the virus from feeding on infected animals. The female mosquito is also capable of transmitting the virus directly to her offspring via eggs leading to new generations of infected mosquitoes hatching from eggs.
RVF virus is able to infect many species of animals causing severe disease in domesticated animals including cattle, sheep, camels and goats. Sheep and goats appear to be more susceptible than cattle or camels. An outbreak of RVF in animals frequently manifests itself as a wave of unexplained abortions among livestock and may signal the start of an epidemic.
The analysis of major RVF outbreaks show two ecologically distinct situations :
Most human infections result from direct or indirect contact with the blood or organs of infected animals. The virus can be transmitted to humans through the handling of animal tissue during slaughtering or butchering, assisting with animal births, conducting veterinary procedures, or from the disposal of carcasses or fetuses. Certain occupational groups such as herders, farmers, slaughterhouse workers and veterinarians are therefore at higher risk of infection. There is some evidence that humans may become infected with RVF by ingesting the unpasteurized or uncooked milk of infected animals.
Human infections have also resulted from the bites of infected mosquitoes, most commonly the Aedes and Culex mosquitoes. The transmission of RVF virus by blood-feeding flies is also possible.
To date, no human-to-human transmission of RVF has been documented, and no transmission of RVF to health care workers has been reported when standard infection control precautions have been implemented. .
The incubation period for RVF varies from 2 to 6 days.
Most infections in human will lead to no symptoms or mild form of the disease characterized by a feverish syndrome with sudden onset of flu-like fever, muscle and joint pain and headache. Some patients develop neck stiffness, sensitivity to light, loss of appetite and vomiting. In these patients the disease, in its early stages, may be mistaken for meningitis.
The symptoms of RVF usually last from 4 to 7 days, after which time the immune response becomes detectable with the appearance of antibodies and the virus disappears from the blood.
A small percentage of patients develop a much more severe form of the disease. This usually appears as one or more of the three following syndromes:
It can be difficult to clinically distinguish RVF from other infectious diseases such as malaria, typhoid fever, shigellosis, yellow fever and other viral haemorrhagic fevers, especially early in the course of the disease.
Confirmation that symptoms are caused by RVF virus infection are made using the following diagnostic methods:
Samples collected from patients are an extreme biohazard risk. Laboratory testing on non-inactivated samples should be conducted under maximum biological containment conditions. All non-inactivated biological specimens should be packaged using the triple packaging system when transported nationally and internationally.
As most human cases of RVF are relatively mild and of short duration, no specific treatment is required for these patients. For the more severe cases, the predominant treatment is early intensive supportive care including fluid management and treatment of specific symptoms.
An inactivated vaccine has been developed for human use. However, this vaccine is not licensed and is not commercially available. It has been used experimentally to protect veterinary and laboratory personnel at high risk of exposure to RVF. Other candidate vaccines are under investigation.
Outbreaks of RVF in animals can be prevented by a sustained programme of preventive animal vaccination. Both modified live attenuated virus and inactivated virus vaccines have been developed for veterinary use.
Animal immunization must be implemented prior to an outbreak if an epizootic is to be prevented. Once an outbreak has occurred, animal vaccination should NOT be implemented because there is a high risk of intensifying the outbreak through the use of multi-dose vials and the re-use of needles and syringes.
Restricting or banning the movement of livestock may be effective in slowing the expansion of the virus from infected to uninfected areas.
As outbreaks of RVF in animals precede human cases, the establishment of an active animal health surveillance system to detect new cases is essential in providing early warning for veterinary and human public health authorities.
Raising awareness of the risk factors of RVF infection as well as the protective measures individuals can take to prevent mosquito bites is the only way to reduce human infection.
Public health messages for risk reduction should focus on:
Although no human-to-human transmission of RVF has been demonstrated, there is still a theoretical risk of transmission of the virus from infected patients to healthcare workers through contact with infected blood or tissues. Healthcare and laboratory workers caring for patients with suspected or confirmed RVF should implement standard precautions when handling specimens from patients.
Forecasting can predict climatic conditions that are frequently associated with an increased risk of outbreaks, and may improve disease control. In Africa, Saudi Arabia and Yemen RVF outbreaks are closely associated with periods of above-average rainfall; in East Africa they are closely associated with the heavy rainfall that occurs during the warm phase of the El Niño–Southern Oscillation phenomenon.
Forecasting models and early warning systems for RVF using satellite images and weather/climate forecasting data can be used to trigger detection of animal cases at an early stage of an outbreak, enabling authorities to implement measures to avert epidemics.
WHO is working with partners to support RVF surveillance, diagnostic capacity, patient care and outbreak response activities in at-risk countries.
WHO coordinates with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the World Organization of Animal Health to improve anticipation of outbreaks in humans and implement activities at the animal-human-ecosystem interface.
Related
News
Feature stories
Documents

========================================
ringworm
========================================
Ringworm, also known as tinea, is a common fungal infection of the skin. It can affect both humans and animals. The infection is caused by fungi, known as dermatophytes, that thrive on the skin, hair, and nails. Symptoms of ringworm include itching, redness, and a characteristic ring-shaped rash. While not life threatening, ringworm can be uncomfortable. embarrassing and easily spread. It is typically treated with antifungal medications applied directly to the skin, but oral medications may be necessary for severe or widespread infections. There is a spreading outbreak of extensive and drug-resistant ringworm in many countries
Tinea is one of the commonest dermatological conditions, accounting for a substantial proportion of skin disease in developing countries. Globally, fungal skin infections are estimated to affect more than 650 million people at any time and of these, ringworm accounts for over half the cases (1).
Ringworm is found in every country but some forms are common in resource-poor tropical settings. Prevalence of scalp infection among children in these areas may reach more than 25 % of school children under 10 (2). Cases are sporadic in some high-income countries but may lead to outbreaks in schools. Tinea pedis infections are often endemic in heavy industries and can result in loss of work and complications due to secondary infection. There is a growing worldwide problem of ringworm or tinea extensively affecting the body, tinea corporis. First reported in India, it has spread widely in communities in South-East Asia and is now increasingly reported in the Middle East, Europe, Africa and the Americas. Many of these cases are resistant to the common antifungal medications, posing an increasing public health problem. Ringworm can affect various parts of the body, and the symptoms may vary depending on the location of the infection. Ringworm is contagious and can be spread through:
Several factors can increase the risk of developing ringworm.
Ringworm is usually diagnosed based on its characteristic appearance and symptoms. A health-care provider may also take a skin scraping or nail clipping to confirm the diagnosis. This sample is then examined under a microscope or sent to a laboratory for fungal culture or molecular diagnosis. Ringworm is typically treated with antifungal medications. The type of medication and duration of treatment will depend on the location and severity of the infection.
In addition to medication, keeping the affected area clean and dry can help promote healing and prevent the spread of infection. Preventing ringworm involves reducing the risk of exposure and transmission.
While ringworm is usually not serious, it can lead to complications if left untreated or if the infection is severe.
The World Health Organization , through the initiative to address neglected tropical diseases of the skin , recognizes a growing problem of fungal infections of the skin and the emergence of antifungal resistance. The resolution on skin diseases as a global public health priority that was adopted during May 2025 World Health Assembly is expected to help advance work on fungal diseases including ringworm.
References
Related
WHO fungal priority pathogens list to guide research, development and public health action
Fact sheets

========================================
road-traffic-injuries
========================================
Key facts
Every year the lives of approximately 1.19 million people are cut short as a result of a road traffic crash. Between 20 and 50 million more people suffer non-fatal injuries, with many incurring a disability.
Road traffic injuries cause considerable economic losses to individuals, their families, and to nations as a whole. These losses arise from the cost of treatment as well as lost productivity for those killed or disabled by their injuries, and for family members who need to take time off work or school to care for the injured. Road traffic crashes cost most countries 3% of their gross domestic product.
More than 90% of road traffic deaths occur in low- and middle-income countries. Road traffic death rates are highest in the WHO African Region and lowest in the European Region. Even within high-income countries, people from lower socioeconomic backgrounds are more likely to be involved in road traffic crashes.
Road traffic injuries are the leading cause of death for children and young adults aged 5–29 years. Two thirds of road traffic fatalities occur among people of working age ,
Males are typically 3 times more likely to be killed in road crashes than females. Transport systems should be responsive to the needs of users and forgiving of human error. The safe system approach to road safety aims to ensure a safe transport system for all road users. This approach takes into account people’s vulnerability to serious injuries and recognizes that the system should be designed to accommodate human error. The cornerstones of this approach are safe roads and roadsides, safe speeds, safe vehicles, and safe road users, all of which must be addressed in order to eliminate fatal crashes and reduce serious injuries.
There are many types of distractions that can lead to impaired driving. The distraction caused by mobile phones is a growing concern for road safety.
The design of roads can have a considerable impact on their safety. Ideally, roads should be designed keeping in mind the safety of all road users. This would mean making sure that there are adequate facilities for pedestrians, cyclists and motorcyclists. Measures such as footpaths, cycling lanes, safe crossing points and other traffic calming measures can be critical to reducing the risk of injury among these road users. Safe vehicles play a critical role in averting crashes and reducing the likelihood of serious injury. There are a number of UN regulations on vehicle safety that, if applied to countries’ manufacturing and production standards, would potentially save many lives. These include requiring vehicle manufacturers to meet front and side impact regulations, to include electronic stability control and to ensure airbags and seat-belts are fitted in all vehicles. Without these basic standards the risk of traffic injuries – both to those in the vehicle and those out of it – is considerably increased.
Delays in detecting and providing care for those involved in a road traffic crash increase the severity of injuries. Care of injuries after a crash has occurred is extremely time-sensitive: delays of minutes can make the difference between life and death. Improving post-crash care requires ensuring access to timely prehospital care, and improving the quality of both prehospital and hospital care, such as through specialist training programmes. If traffic laws on drink-driving, seat-belt wearing, speed limits, helmets and child restraints are not enforced, they cannot bring about the expected reduction in road traffic fatalities and injuries related to specific behaviours. Thus, if traffic laws are not enforced or are perceived as not being enforced, it is likely they will not be complied with and therefore will have very little chance of influencing behaviour.
Effective enforcement includes establishing, regularly updating, and enforcing laws at the national, municipal, and local levels that address the above mentioned risk factors. It includes also the definition of appropriate penalties.
Road traffic injuries can be prevented. Governments must take action to address road safety in a holistic manner. This requires involvement from multiple sectors such as transport, police, health and education, as well as the private sector and civil society organizations. It requires actions that address the safety of roads, vehicles and all road users.
Effective interventions include designing safer infrastructure and incorporating road safety features into land-use and transport planning, improving the safety features of vehicles; enhancing post-crash care for victims of road traffic crashes; setting and enforcing laws relating to key risks, and raising public awareness.
WHO works with Member States and partners across sectors to support road safety evaluation, implementation and planning. As the lead agency for road safety in the United Nations, WHO plays a key role in guiding global efforts by advocating for road safety at the highest levels, compiling and sharing good practices and raising awareness of road safety. WHO serves as the secretariat for the United Nations Decade of Action for Road Safety 2021–2030, which aims to reduce road traffic deaths and injuries by at least 50% by 2030. This includes convening a global network of heads of national road safety agencies, producing global status reports to track progress, and providing technical assistance. WHO works with a range of partners to provide technical support to countries. For example, WHO works with the Bloomberg Initiative for Global Road Safety to reduce fatalities and injuries from road traffic crashes in a range of low- and middle-income countries.
WHO chairs the UN Road Safety Collaboration mechanism and organizes and hosts, with key partners, high profile advocacy events such as UN road safety weeks and the annual World Day of Remembrance for Road Traffic Victims.
Related
News

========================================
rubella
========================================
Rubella is a highly contagious disease caused by a virus. It spreads easily when an infected person coughs or sneezes. Most children and adults who get rubella have a mild fever and rash. When a woman is infected with the rubella virus early in pregnancy, she has a 90% chance of passing the virus on to her fetus. Rubella in pregnancy, especially during the first trimester, can result in miscarriage, fetal death, stillbirth, or infants with congenital malformations, known as congenital rubella syndrome .
Being vaccinated is the best way to prevent getting sick with rubella or spreading it to other people. The vaccine is safe and helps your body fight off the virus.
There were an estimated 17 865 cases of rubella in 78 countries in 2022, despite the availability of a safe and cost-effective vaccine.
The Measles & Rubella Partnership , previously the Measles & Rubella Initiative, has been helping deliver measles and rubella vaccines since 2000 to children worldwide, contributing to saving an estimated 57 million lives and substantially reducing birth defects due to congenital rubella infections.
In children, the disease is usually mild, with symptoms including a rash, low fever , nausea and mild conjunctivitis. The rash, which occurs in 50–80% of cases, lasts 1–3 days and usually starts on the face and neck before progressing down the body. Swollen lymph glands behind the ears and in the neck are the most characteristic clinical feature. Infected adults, more commonly women, may develop arthritis and painful joints that usually last from 3–10 days.
Once a person is infected, the virus spreads throughout the body in about 5–7 days. Symptoms usually appear 2 to 3 weeks after exposure. The most infectious period is usually 1–5 days after the appearance of the rash.
When a woman is infected with the rubella virus early in pregnancy, she has a 90% chance of passing the virus on to her fetus. This can cause the death of the fetus, or it may cause CRS. Infants with CRS may excrete the virus for a year or more.
Children with CRS can suffer hearing impairments, eye and heart defects and other lifelong disabilities, including autism, diabetes mellitus and thyroid dysfunction – many of which require costly therapy, surgeries and other expensive care.
The highest risk of CRS is in countries where women of childbearing age do not have immunity to the disease . Before the introduction of the vaccine, up to 4 babies in every 1000 live births were born with CRS.
The rubella vaccine is a live attenuated strain, and a single dose gives more than 95% long-lasting immunity, which is similar to that induced by natural infection.
Rubella vaccines are available either in monovalent formulation or more commonly in combinations with other vaccines such as with vaccines against measles (MR), measles and mumps , or measles, mumps and varicella .
Adverse reactions following vaccination are generally mild. They may include pain and redness at the injection site, low-grade fever, rash and muscle aches. Mass immunization campaigns in the Region of the Americas involving more than 250 million adolescents and adults did not identify any serious adverse reactions associated with the vaccine.
WHO recommends that all countries that have not yet introduced rubella vaccine should consider doing so using existing, well-established measles immunization programmes. To-date, four WHO regions have established goals to eliminate this preventable cause of birth defects. In 2015, the WHO Region of the Americas became the first in the world to be declared free of endemic transmission of rubella.
The number of countries using rubella vaccines in their national programme continues to steadily increase. As of January 2024, 175 out of 194 countries had introduced rubella vaccines and global coverage was estimated at 69%. Reported rubella cases declined 97%, from 670 894 cases in 102 countries in 2000 to 17 865 cases in 78 countries in 2022. CRS rates are highest in the WHO African and South-East Asian regions where vaccination coverage is lowest.
The Measles & Rubella Partnership , previously the Measles & Rubella Initiative, has been helping deliver measles and rubella vaccines since 2000 to children worldwide, contributing to saving an estimated 57 million lives and substantially reducing birth defects due to congenital rubella infections. Despite this progress, measles continues to be one of the leading vaccine preventable killer of children globally. Under the umbrella of Immunization Agenda 2030 and guided by the Measles and Rubella Strategic Framework 2030 , M&RP’s current mission includes addressing decline in national vaccination coverage, hastening COVID-19 pandemic recovery and accelerating progress towards creating a world free of measles and rubella. The partnership consists of American Red Cross; The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation; Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance; U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, United Nations Foundation, UNICEF and WHO. M&RP is part of IA2030, an ambitious global strategy to maximize the lifesaving impact of vaccines – one of the most successful and cost-effective public health interventions of all time. IA2030 aims to avert over 50 million deaths by 2030 through access to essential vaccines and help build healthcare systems that can withstand the impact of pandemics and deliver rapid vaccination response.
Related
News
Fact sheets
Feature stories

========================================
salmonella
========================================
Salmonella is a gram negative rods genus belonging to the Enterobacteriaceae family. Within 2 species, Salmonella bongori and Salmonella enterica, over 2500 different serotypes or serovars have been identified to date. Salmonella is a ubiquitous and hardy bacteria that can survive several weeks in a dry environment and several months in water. While all serotypes can cause disease in humans, a few are host-specific and can reside in only one or a few animal species: for example, Salmonella enterica serotype Dublin in cattle and Salmonella enterica serotype Choleraesuis in pigs. When these particular serotypes cause disease in humans, it is often invasive and can be life-threatening. Most serotypes, however, are present in a wide range of hosts. Typically, such serotypes cause gastroenteritis, which is often uncomplicated and does not need treatment, but disease can be severe in the young, the elderly, and patients with weakened immunity. This group features Salmonella enterica serotype Enteritidis and Salmonella enterica serotype Typhimurium, the two most important serotypes of Salmonella transmitted from animals to humans in most parts of the world.
Salmonellosis is a disease caused by the bacteria Salmonella. It is usually characterized by acute onset of fever, abdominal pain, diarrhoea, nausea and sometimes vomiting.
The onset of disease symptoms occurs 6–72 hours after ingestion of Salmonella, and illness lasts 2–7 days.
Symptoms of salmonellosis are relatively mild and patients will make a recovery without specific treatment in most cases. However, in some cases, particularly in children and elderly patients, the associated dehydration can become severe and life-threatening.
Although large Salmonella outbreaks usually attract media attention, 60–80% of all salmonellosis cases are not recognized as part of a known outbreak and are classified as sporadic cases, or are not diagnosed as such at all.
Treatment in severe cases is electrolyte replacement (to provide electrolytes, such as sodium, potassium and chloride ions, lost through vomiting and diarrhoea) and rehydration.
Routine antimicrobial therapy is not recommended for mild or moderate cases in healthy individuals. This is because antimicrobials may not completely eliminate the bacteria and may select for resistant strains, which subsequently can lead to the drug becoming ineffective. However, health risk groups such as infants, the elderly, and immunocompromised patients may need to receive antimicrobial therapy. Antimicrobials are also administered if the infection spreads from the intestine to other body parts. Because of the global increase of antimicrobial resistance, treatment guidelines should be reviewed on a regular basis taking into account the resistance pattern of the bacteria based on the local surveillance system.
Prevention requires control measures at all stages of the food chain, from agricultural production, to processing, manufacturing and preparation of foods in both commercial establishments and at home. Preventive measures for Salmonella in the home are similar to those used against other foodborne bacterial diseases .
The contact between infants/young children and pet animals that may be carrying Salmonella needs careful supervision.
National and regional surveillance systems on foodborne diseases are important means to know and follow the situation of these diseases and also to detect and respond to salmonellosis and other enteric infections in early stages, and thus to prevent them from further spreading.
The following recommendations will help ensure safety while travelling:
WHO provides the following guidance for people handling food:
The WHO Five keys to growing safer fruits and vegetables: promoting health by decreasing microbial contamination and the Five keys to safer aquaculture products to protect public health provide rural workers, including small farmers who grow fresh fruits and vegetables and fish for themselves, their families and for sale in local market with key practices to prevent microbial contamination.
The Five keys to growing safer fruits and vegetables are:
The Five keys to safer aquaculture products to protect public health are:
In partnership with other stakeholders, WHO is strongly advocating the importance of food safety as an essential element in ensuring access to safe and nutritious diets. WHO is providing policies and recommendations that cover the entire food chain from production to consumption, making use of different types of expertise across different sectors.
WHO is working towards the strengthening of food safety systems in an increasingly globalized world. Setting international food safety standards, enhancing disease surveillance, educating consumers and training food handlers in safe food handling are amongst the most critical interventions in the prevention of foodborne illnesses.
WHO is strengthening the capacities of national and regional laboratories in the surveillance of foodborne pathogens, such as Campylobacter and Salmonella.
WHO is also promoting the integrated surveillance of antimicrobial resistance of pathogens in the food chain, collecting samples from humans, food and animals and analysing data across the sectors.
WHO, jointly with FAO, is assisting Member States by coordinating international efforts for early detection and response to foodborne disease outbreaks through the network of national authorities in Member States.
WHO also provides scientific assessments as basis for international food standards, guidelines and recommendations developed by the FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius Commission to prevent foodborne diseases.
Related
News
Fact sheets
Events

========================================
sand-and-dust-storms
========================================
Sand and dust storms are common meteorological hazards in arid and semi-arid regions that generate large amounts of airborne mineral dust particles.
Sand and dust storms present a formidable, widespread threat to health and hinder the achievement of sustainable development in its economic, social and environmental dimensions. Originating from the land, these particles of various size and composition get lifted in the air, creating storms. This is especially the case in dry regions, where vegetation is sparse or absent, such as deserts and agricultural land impacted by drought. Their wide impact goes beyond human health and air quality, as it also impacts agriculture, environment, industry, transport and water quality. There is a wealth of scientific evidence on associations between desert dust and sand storms and adverse short term health effects, yet there is a need for more research on the health impacts of SDS, including harmonized protocol to assess exposure, more studies in dust-emitting areas as well as long term health effects.
Sand and dust storms episodes contribute directly to air pollution by increasing particulate matter concentrations. In some regions dust is a main source of air pollution from particulate matter. These dust episodes constitute a growing environmental and public health concern, mainly for respiratory and cardiovascular diseases. They impact many areas of the world, whether nearby or thousands of kilometres from deserts or dust emission sources, due to their effect on air quality.
The health community often uses the term “desert dust” when considering the health impacts of mineral dust in the air, but not all mineral dust in the air comes from deserts. For example, there are significant threats to health when mineral soil is lifted from ploughed or bare fields, which can occur in temperate or even humid climates.
Airborne dust is not restricted to geographical boundaries and so requires regional cooperation across nations to address the problem. Being a global phenomenon that affects specific areas, it is a challenge for the health sector because of the difficulty in characterizing the exposure and the limited evidence on its long-term health effects. There is also a gap between health evidence in dust emitting regions and receptor regions, as desert dust events often involve long-range transport over great distances . Most of the health studies related to SDS events occur in high-income countries in receptor regions.
Currently, the response from governments is based on the knowledge of short terms health effects, limited early warning systems and the provision of information to vulnerable groups in real time, as well as the impact of emergency visits. Sand and dust storms are also an important transboundary issue. Although staying close to the ground, mineral dust can travel considerable distances when lifted kilometres high into the atmosphere. Examples include dust from the Sahara frequently reaching the Caribbean and dust from inner northwest Asia often reaching the Korean Peninsula and Japan.
Going forward there is a need for strengthened collaboration between medical and environmental scientists to explore better exposure assessment, dust size fraction and specific chemical composition. The health sector should also address the gaps in knowledge and response on the health impacts of desert dust in the longer term and continue strengthening collaboration with appropriate government entities to provide a timely and effective public health response. Furthermore, collaborative and multi-country research – for both short- and long-term health impacts of SDS as well as the synergistic effects of both exposure to heat and particulate matter – is critical to protecting public health.
Starting in 2023, the International Day of Combating Sand and Dust Storms will be observed every year on 12 July.
WHO plays a crucial role in developing normative guidance and recommendations to address the health impacts of sand and dust storms. WHO recognizes that exposure to aeolian mineral dust can have detrimental effects on human health and aims to provide evidence-based guidelines for protecting populations from these hazards. Sand and dust storms’ effects on health have been discussed in the 2021 WHO air quality guideline, and elements of guidance is provided in the form of a good practice statement. WHO is engaged in advancing the current knowledge on sand and dust storms and their linkages to public health through the commission of a research group whose expertise feeds into the Air Quality Guidelines or other technical reports.
In 2021, WHO establish the first WHO expert group focusing on air pollution and health, the Global Air pollution and Health - Technical Advisory Group . One of its sub-groups, the Expert Working Group on Desert Dust and Health, is working to synthesize evidence on the short- and long-term health impacts of desert dust, provide guidance on harmonized exposure assessment of desert dust and monitoring of health effects, evaluate the implementation of the current good practice statements as provided in the WHO AQG, and strengthen future normative recommendations. WHO is responding by building the capacity of the health sector to effectively engage in health, working across sectors to support cities, regions and countries to produce contextual, meaningful and actionable information on the health, economic and climate impacts of urban and rural environments.
WHO collaborates closely with international organizations such as the World Meteorological Organization through its Sand and Dust Storm Warning Advisory and Assessment System initiative and leads the working group on health of the United Nations Coalition to Combat Sand and Dust Storms to integrate health arguments and tools in action plans and provide a timely response to health threats.
The Coalition aims, among other goals, to promote and coordinate a collaborative UN-system response to SDS on local, regional and global scales, ensuring unified and coherent actions are taken. This coalition formed in 2018 and was an important milestone in international collaboration and acknowledgement of the need for better coordination among international, multilaterals and intergovernmental entities.
More information on the UN Coalition to combat sand and dust storms is available here.
References
Related
Fact sheets
More
Sand and dust storms - Coalition
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations – Sand and Dust StormsUN Coalition to Combat Sand and Dust Storms – UN Environment Management GroupSand and dust storms compendiumWorld Meteorological Organization – Sand and dust stormsInternational Day of Combating Sand and Dust StormsLwin et al – Effects of Desert Dust and Sandstorms on Human Health: A Scoping ReviewFussel & Kelly – Mechanisms underlying the health effects of desert sand dustQuerol et al - Monitoring the impact of desert dust outbreaks for air quality for health studiesTobias et al - Short-term exposure to desert dust and sandstorms and all-cause and cause-specific mortality and morbidityLi at al - Sand and dust storms: a growing global health threat calls for international health studies to support policy actionSafi et al - Time to Act for Clean Air for All in the WHO Eastern Mediterranean Region; Strategic Actions for the Health Sector

========================================
sanitation
========================================
According to the latest WASH-related burden of disease estimates, 1.4 million people die each year as a result of inadequate drinking-water, sanitation and hygiene. The vast majority of these deaths are in low- and middle-income countries. Unsafe sanitation accounts for 564 000 of these deaths, largely from diarrhoeal disease, and it is a major factor in several neglected tropical diseases, including intestinal worms, schistosomiasis and trachoma. Poor sanitation also contributes to malnutrition.
Diarrhoea remains a major killer but is largely preventable. Better water, sanitation, and hygiene could prevent the deaths among children aged under 5 years, 395 000 in the year 2019.
Open defecation perpetuates a vicious cycle of disease and poverty. The countries where open defection is most widespread have the highest number of deaths of children aged under 5 years as well as the highest levels of malnutrition and poverty, and big disparities of wealth. Benefits of improved sanitation extend well beyond reducing the risk of diarrhoea. These include:
A WHO study in 2012 calculated that for every US$ 1.00 invested in sanitation, there was a return of US$ 5.50 in lower health costs, more productivity and fewer premature deaths.
In 2013, the UN Deputy Secretary-General issued a call to action on sanitation that included the elimination of open defecation by 2025. The world is on track to eliminate open defecation by 2030, if not by 2025, but historical rates of progress would need to double for the world to achieve universal coverage with basic sanitation services by 2030. To achieve universal safely managed services, rates would need to increase five-fold. The situation in urban areas, particularly in dense, low income and informal areas, is a growing challenge as sewerage is precarious or non-existent, space for toilets is at a premium, poorly designed and managed pits and septic tanks contaminate open drains and groundwater and services for faecal sludge removal are unavailable or unaffordable. Inequalities are compounded when sewage discharged into storm drains and waterways pollutes poorer low-lowing areas of cities. The effects of climate change – floods, water scarcity and droughts, and sea level rise – is setting back progress for the billions of people without safely managed services and threatens to undermine existing services if they are not made more resilient. Wastewater and sludge are increasingly seen as a valuable resource in the circular economy that can provide reliable water and nutrients for food production and recovered energy in various forms. In fact, use of wastewater and sludge is already commonplace, but much is used unsafely without adequate treatment, controls on use or regulatory oversight. Safe use that prevents transmission of excreta-related disease is vital to reduce harms and maximize beneficial use of wastewater and sludge.
In 2019 UN-Water launched the SDG6 global acceleration framework . On World Toilet Day 2020, WHO and UNICEF launched the State of the world’s sanitation report laying out the scale of the challenge in terms of health impact, sanitation coverage, progress, policy and investment and also laying out an acceleration agenda for sanitation under the GAF.
In 2010, the UN General Assembly recognized access to safe and clean drinking water and sanitation as a human right and called for international efforts to help countries to provide safe, clean, accessible and affordable drinking-water and sanitation. Sustainable Development Goal target 6.2 calls for adequate and equitable sanitation for all and target 6.3 calls for halving the proportion of untreated wastewater and substantially increasing recycling and safe reuse.
As the international authority on public health, WHO leads global efforts to prevent transmission of diseases, advising governments on health-based regulation and service delivery. On sanitation, WHO monitors global burden of disease and the level of sanitation access and wastewater treatment and analyses what helps and hinders progress . Such monitoring gives Member States and donors global data to help decide how to invest in providing toilets and ensuring safe management of wastewater and excreta.
WHO works with partners on promoting effective risk assessment and management practices for sanitation in communities and health facilities based on evidence and tools including WHO guidelines on sanitation and health, safe use of wastewater, recreational water quality and promotion of sanitation safety planning and sanitary inspections, and through communities of practice such as RegNet and the sanitation workers initiative. WHO also supports collaboration between WASH and health programmes where sanitation is critical for disease prevention and risk reduction including neglected tropical diseases, cholera, polio and antimicrobial resistance, and environmental surveillance of pathogens. Aspects of climate resilience are incorporated in all WHO sanitation guidance documents.
References
Related
News
Fact sheets
Feature stories
More
WHO Academy self-paced course on safely managed sanitationProgress on household drinking-water, sanitation and hygiene 2000-2022: Special focus on genderStrong systems and sound investments: Evidence on and key insights into accelerating progress on sanitation, drinking-water and hygiene WHO Academy self-paced course on safely managed sanitation
Progress on household drinking-water, sanitation and hygiene 2000-2022: Special focus on gender
Strong systems and sound investments: Evidence on and key insights into accelerating progress on sanitation, drinking-water and hygiene

========================================
scabies
========================================
Scabies is a parasitic infestation caused by tiny mites that burrow into the skin and lay eggs, causing intense itching and a rash.
Scabies can lead to skin sores and serious complications like septicaemia , heart disease and kidney problems. It is treated using creams or oral medications.
Scabies is contagious and spreads through skin-to-skin contact. It occurs worldwide but is most common in low-income tropical areas. Children and older people in resource-poor areas are at higher risk.
Scabies is one of the commonest dermatological conditions, accounting for a substantial proportion of skin disease in developing countries. Globally, it is estimated to affect more than 200 million people at any time and more than 400 million people cumulatively every year.
Scabies is found in every country but is particularly common in many resource-poor tropical settings, particularly in children and older people. Prevalence among children in these settings may vary from 5% up to 50%. Recurrent infestations are common. The sheer burden of scabies infestation and its complications imposes a major cost on health care systems. Cases are sporadic in high-income countries, yet outbreaks in health institutions and vulnerable communities contribute to significant economic cost in national health services. Several studies have shown that outbreaks of scabies are a major risk factor for kidney disease in the form of acute post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis. A growing body of evidence also implicates impetigo caused by Streptococcus pyogenes in the pathogenesis of rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease.
Symptoms of scabies usually begin 4–6 weeks after infestation. Sometimes there are visible signs before symptoms begin.
Symptoms of scabies include:
Most individuals are infected with 10–15 mites.
People with suppressed immune systems, including people living with HIV, may develop crusted scabies. This severe infection can have thousands or millions or mites and causes dry, scaley areas on the skin. It often does not cause itch. Crusted scabies spreads very easily and can cause secondary infections. It is life threatening. Scabies mites burrow into the top layer of skin, where the adult female lays eggs. The eggs hatch in 3–4 days and develop into adult mites in 1–2 weeks. After 4–6 weeks the patient develops an allergic reaction to the presence of mite proteins and faeces in the scabies burrow, causing intense itch and rash.
Mite effects on immunity, as well as the direct effects of scratching, can lead to inoculation of the skin with bacteria, leading to the development of impetigo , especially in the tropics. Impetigo may become complicated by deeper skin infection such as abscesses or serious invasive disease, including septicaemia. In tropical settings, scabies-associated skin infection is a common risk factor for kidney disease and possibly rheumatic heart disease. Evidence of acute renal damage can be found in up to 10% of children with scabies infestation in resource-poor settings and, in many, this persists for years following infection contributing to permanent kidney damage. Treating scabies as soon as possible is the best way to prevent outbreaks. The mites that cause scabies usually die after 2–3 days away from human skin.
Prevent scabies from spreading with these steps:
Scabies is transmitted person-to-person through close skin contact with an infested individual. The risk of transmission increases with the level of infestation, with highest risk due to contact with individuals with crusted scabies. Transmission due to contact with infested personal items is unlikely with common scabies but may be important for individuals with crusted scabies. As there is an asymptomatic period of infestation, transmission may occur before the initially infested person develops symptoms. Diagnosis of scabies is based on clinical recognition of the typical features of infestation. The diagnosis of scabies can be supported by visual imaging techniques such as dermatoscopy or microscopy of skin scrapings from burrows, but this is generally not necessary, especially in highly endemic areas. Patients typically present with severe itch, linear burrows and papules around the finger webs, wrists, upper and lower limbs, and belt area. Infants and small children may have a more widespread rash, including involvement of the palms, soles of the feet, ankles, and sometimes the scalp. Inflammatory scabies nodules may be seen, particularly on the penis and scrotum of adult males and around the breasts of females. Because of the delay between initial infection and development of symptoms, scabies lesions may be seen in close contacts that have not yet developed itch.
Scabies can be treated with topical creams or oral medication in more severe cases. Itchiness often gets worse for 1–2 weeks after treatment starts.
Topical treatments that are applied to the whole body include:
Ivermectin taken orally is also highly effective, but it should not be taken by pregnant women or children who weigh less than 15 kg.
Treatments do not kill the parasite’s eggs, and treatment should be repeated to kill newly hatched mites. People do not experience symptoms in the early stages of infestation. To reduce spread, all people in the household should be treated, even if they do not have symptoms.
Other treatments may be needed to treat the complications of scabies. Antiseptics or antibiotics are used to treat bacterial skin infections or impetigo.
Patients with crusted scabies are highly infectious and a source of reinfection to the rest of the community. Patients with crusted scabies need intense treatment with both topical and oral medications.
Population control of scabies and its complications has been identified by a number of countries as a public health priority, and several studies have shown that mass drug administration strategies have the potential to substantially reduce prevalence of scabies, with concomitant reductions in impetigo. In 2019 WHO convened an informal consultation of global experts to review available data and develop recommendations on strategies for global and country level control. The experts agreed that there is convincing evidence that MDA can be highly effective in places where the prevalence is 10% or greater, but the evidence for its effectiveness in places with lower prevalence is less clear. The current recommendation is that two doses of ivermectin should be administered and a topical agent such as permethrin 5% cream should be given when ivermectin is contraindicated or not available. There is ongoing research to determine if one dose of treatment is sufficient for MDA, however currently the evidence is inconclusive. Further research is required to define the strategies to be used when the prevalence is low, either at baseline or when achieved by MDA.
Outbreaks of scabies can occur in either closed, institutional settings or open community settings. Refugee or internally displaced person camps are at particularly high risk due to overcrowding which increases skin to skin contact. Outbreaks can be extended and difficult to control. The general principles include surveillance in high-risk settings, early confirmation of an outbreak, and involvement of public health experts.
The WHO informal consultation on a Framework for Scabies Control Meeting Report outlines the key operational research that is still required to develop guidelines for control and surveillance strategy for all contexts.
Large scale scabies MDAs are ongoing in PNG, Vanuatu, Fiji and Solomon Islands.
In 2017, scabies and other ectoparasites were included as Neglected Tropical Diseases by the WHO, in response to requests from Member States and the recommendations of the WHO Strategic and Technical Advisory Group for NTDs.
WHO 2030 global targets for scabies include:
WHO works with Member States and partners to develop control strategies and scabies outbreak response plans. WHO recommends that control strategies for scabies should be part of an integrated skin NTDs approach adapted to the diseases present in a particular country in order to facilitate rapid, cost-effective uptake of the strategy. Ivermectin is now included on the WHO essential medicines list for scabies and a number of suppliers have been WHO prequalified.
References:
Related
News
Fact sheets
More
Recognizing neglected tropical diseases through changes on the skin: a training guide for front-line health workers

========================================
schistosomiasis
========================================
Schistosomiasis is an acute and chronic parasitic disease caused by blood flukes of the genus Schistosoma. Estimates show that at least 251.4 million people required preventive treatment in 2021. Preventive treatment, which should be repeated over a number of years, will reduce and prevent morbidity. Schistosomiasis transmission has been reported from 78 countries. However, preventive chemotherapy for schistosomiasis, where people and communities are targeted for large-scale treatment, is only required in 51 endemic countries with moderate-to-high transmission.
People become infected when larval forms of the parasite – released by freshwater snails – penetrate the skin during contact with infested water.
Transmission occurs when people suffering from schistosomiasis contaminate freshwater sources with faeces or urine containing parasite eggs, which hatch in water.
In the body, the larvae develop into adult schistosomes. Adult worms live in the blood vessels where the females release eggs. Some of the eggs are passed out of the body in the faeces or urine to continue the parasite’s lifecycle. Others become trapped in body tissues, causing immune reactions and progressive damage to organs.
Schistosomiasis is prevalent in tropical and subtropical areas, especially in poor communities without access to safe drinking water and adequate sanitation. It is estimated that at least 90% of those requiring treatment for schistosomiasis live in Africa.
There are 2 major forms of schistosomiasis – intestinal and urogenital – caused by 5 main species of blood fluke.
Table: Parasite species and geographical distribution of schistosomiasis
Schistosomiasis mostly affects poor and rural communities, particularly agricultural and fishing populations. Women doing domestic chores in infested water, such as washing clothes, are also at risk and can develop female genital schistosomiasis. Inadequate hygiene and contact with infected water make children especially vulnerable to infection.
Migration to urban areas and population movements are introducing the disease to new areas. Increasing population size and the corresponding needs for power and water often result in development schemes, and environmental modifications facilitate transmission.
With the rise in eco-tourism and travel to remote areas, increasing numbers of tourists are contracting schistosomiasis. At times, tourists present severe acute infection and unusual problems including paralysis.
Urogenital schistosomiasis is also considered to be a risk factor for HIV infection, especially in women.
Symptoms of schistosomiasis are caused mainly by the body’s reaction to the worms’ eggs.
Intestinal schistosomiasis can result in abdominal pain, diarrhoea, and blood in the stool. Liver enlargement is common in advanced cases and is frequently associated with an accumulation of fluid in the peritoneal cavity and hypertension of the abdominal blood vessels. In such cases there may also be enlargement of the spleen.
The classic sign of urogenital schistosomiasis is haematuria . Kidney damage and fibrosis of the bladder and ureter are sometimes diagnosed in advanced cases. Bladder cancer is another possible complication in the later stages. In women, urogenital schistosomiasis may present with genital lesions, vaginal bleeding, pain during sexual intercourse and nodules in the vulva. In men, urogenital schistosomiasis can induce pathology of the seminal vesicles, prostate and other organs. This disease may also have other long-term irreversible consequences, including infertility.
The economic and health effects of schistosomiasis are considerable and the disease disables more than it kills. In children, schistosomiasis can cause anaemia, stunting and a reduced ability to learn, although the effects are usually reversible with treatment. Chronic schistosomiasis may affect people’s ability to work and in some cases can result in death. The number of deaths due to schistosomiasis is difficult to estimate because of hidden pathologies such as liver and kidney failure, bladder cancer and ectopic pregnancies due to female genital schistosomiasis.
Deaths due to schistosomiasis are currently estimated at 11 792 globally per year. However, these figures are likely underestimated and need to be reassessed. Schistosomiasis is diagnosed through the detection of parasite eggs in stool or urine specimens. Antibodies and/or antigens detected in blood or urine samples are also indications of infection.
For urogenital schistosomiasis, a filtration technique using nylon, paper or polycarbonate filters is the standard diagnostic technique. Children with S. haematobium almost always have microscopic blood in their urine which can be detected by chemical reagent strips.
The eggs of intestinal schistosomiasis can be detected in faecal specimens through a technique using methylene blue-stained cellophane soaked in glycerin or glass slides, known as the Kato-Katz technique. In S. mansoni transmission areas, the circulating cathodic antigen test can also be used.
For people living in non-endemic or low-transmission areas, serological and immunological tests may be useful in showing exposure to infection and the need for thorough examination, treatment and follow-up.
The control of schistosomiasis is based on large-scale treatment of at-risk population groups, access to safe water, improved sanitation, hygiene education and behaviour change, and snail control and environmental management.
The new neglected tropical diseases road map 2021–2030, adopted by the World Health Assembly, set as global goals the elimination of schistosomiasis as a public health problem in all endemic countries and the interruption of its transmission in selected countries.
The WHO strategy for schistosomiasis control focuses on reducing disease through periodic, targeted treatment with praziquantel through the large-scale treatment of affected populations. It involves regular treatment of all at-risk groups. In a few countries, where there is low transmission, the interruption of the transmission of the disease should be aimed for.
Groups targeted for treatment are:
WHO recommends treatment of infected preschool aged children based on diagnostic and clinical judgment and their inclusion in large-scale treatment using the paediatric praziquantel formulation.
The frequency of treatment is determined by the prevalence of infection in school-age children. In high-transmission areas, treatment may have to be repeated every year for several years. Monitoring is essential to determine the impact of control interventions.
The aim is to reduce disease morbidity and transmission towards the elimination of the disease as public health problem. Periodic treatment of at-risk populations will cure mild symptoms and prevent infected people from developing severe, late-stage chronic disease. However, a major limitation to schistosomiasis control has been the limited availability of praziquantel, particularly for the treatment of adults. Data for 2021 show that 29.9% of people requiring treatment were reached globally, with a proportion of 43.3% of school-aged children requiring preventive chemotherapy for schistosomiasis being treated. A drop of 38% compared to 2019, due to the COVID-19 pandemic which suspended treatment campaigns in many endemic areas.
Praziquantel is the recommended treatment against all forms of schistosomiasis. It is effective, safe and low-cost. Even though re-infection may occur after treatment, the risk of developing severe disease is diminished and even reversed when treatment is initiated and repeated in childhood.
Schistosomiasis control has been successfully implemented over the past 40 years in several countries, including Brazil, Cambodia, China, Egypt, Mauritius, Islamic Republic of Iran, Oman, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Morocco, Tunisia and others. In many countries it has been possible to scale-up schistosomiasis treatment to the national level and have an impact on the disease in a few years. An assessment of the status of transmission is required in several countries.
Over the past 10 years there has been scale-up of treatment campaigns in a number of sub-Saharan countries, where most of those at risk live. These treatments campaigns resulted in the decrease of prevalence of schistosomiasis in school age children by almost 60% (1). WHO’s work on schistosomiasis is part of an integrated approach to the control of neglected tropical diseases. Although medically diverse, neglected tropical diseases share features that allow them to persist in conditions of poverty, where they cluster and frequently overlap.
WHO coordinates the strategy of preventive chemotherapy in consultation with collaborating centres and partners from academic and research institutions, the private sector, nongovernmental organizations, international development agencies and other United Nations organizations. WHO develops technical guidelines and tools for use by national control programmes.
Working with partners and the private sector, WHO has advocated for increased access to praziquantel and resources for implementation. A significant amount of praziquantel – enough to treat more than 100 million children of the school age per year – has been pledged by the private sector and development partners.
References
Related
Fact sheets

========================================
schizophrenia
========================================
Schizophrenia is characterised by significant impairments in the way reality is perceived and changes in behaviour related to:
People with schizophrenia often also experience persistent difficulties with their cognitive or thinking skills, such as memory, attention, and problem-solving.
At least one third of people with schizophrenia experiences complete remission of symptoms (1). Some people with schizophrenia experience worsening and remission of symptoms periodically throughout their lives, others a gradual worsening of symptoms over time.
Magnitude and impact
Schizophrenia affects approximately 24 million people or 1 in 300 people worldwide. This rate is 1 in 222 people among adults (2). It is not as common as many other mental disorders. Onset is most often during late adolescence and the twenties, and onset tends to happen earlier among men than among women. Schizophrenia is frequently associated with significant distress and impairment in personal, family, social, educational, occupational, and other important areas of life. People with schizophrenia are 2 to 3 times more likely to die early than the general population (3). This is often due to physical illnesses, such as cardiovascular, metabolic, and infectious diseases.
People with schizophrenia often experience human rights violations both inside mental health institutions and in community settings. Stigma against people with this condition is intense and widespread, causing social exclusion, and impacting their relationships with others, including family and friends. This contributes to discrimination, which in turn can limit access to general health care, education, housing, and employment. During humanitarian and public health emergencies, extreme stress and fear, breakdown of social supports, isolation and disruption of health-care services and supply of medication can occur. These changes can have an impact on the lives of people with schizophrenia, such as exacerbation of existing symptoms. During emergencies, people with schizophrenia are more vulnerable than others to various human rights violations, including neglect, abandonment, homelessness, abuse and exclusion. Research has not identified one single cause of schizophrenia. It is thought that an interaction between genes and a range of environmental factors may cause schizophrenia. Psychosocial factors may also affect the onset and course of schizophrenia. Heavy use of cannabis is associated with an elevated risk of the disorder. Currently, the vast majority of people with schizophrenia around the world are not receiving mental health care. Approximately 50% of people in mental hospitals have a schizophrenia diagnosis (4). Only 31.3% of people with psychosis receive specialist mental health care (5). Most resources for mental health services are inefficiently spent on care within mental hospitals.
There is clear evidence that mental hospitals are not effective in providing the care that people with mental health conditions need and, regularly, violate the basic human rights of persons with schizophrenia. Efforts to transfer care from mental health institutions to the community need to be expanded and accelerated. Such efforts start with the development of a range of quality community-based mental health services. Options for community-based mental health care include integration in primary health and general hospital care, community mental health centres, day centres, supported housing, and outreach services for home-based support. The engagement of the person with schizophrenia, family members and the wider community in providing support is important.
A range of effective care options for people with schizophrenia exist, and these include medication, psychoeducation, family interventions, cognitive-behavioural therapy and psychosocial rehabilitation . Facilitated assisted living, supported housing and supported employment are essential care options that should be available for people with schizophrenia. A recovery-oriented approach – giving people agency in treatment decisions – is essential for people with schizophrenia and for their families and/or caregivers as well.
WHO’s Comprehensive Mental Health Action Plan 2013-2030 highlights the steps required to provide appropriate services for people with mental disorders including schizophrenia. A key recommendation of the Action Plan is to shift services from institutions to the community. The WHO Special Initiative for Mental Health aims to further progress towards objectives of the Comprehensive Mental Health Action Plan 2013-2030 by ensuring 100 million more people have access to quality and affordable care for mental health conditions.
WHO's Mental Health Gap Action Programme uses evidence-based technical guidance, tools and training packages to expand service in countries, especially in resource-poor settings. It focuses on a prioritized set of conditions, including psychosis, directing capacity building towards non-specialized health-care providers in an integrated approach that promotes mental health at all levels of care. Currently mhGAP is being implemented in more than 100 WHO Member States.
The WHO QualityRights Project involves improving the quality of care and human rights conditions in mental health and social care facilities and to empower organizations to advocate for the health of people with mental health conditions and psychosocial disabilities. The WHO guidance on community mental health services and person-centred and rights-based approaches provides information and support to all stakeholders who wish to develop or transform their mental health system and services to align with international human rights standards including the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
(1) Harrison G, Hopper K, Craig T, Laska E, Siegel C, Wanderling J. Recovery from psychotic illness: a 15- and 25-year international follow-up study. Br J Psychiatry 2001;178:506-17. (2) Institute of health Metrics and Evaluation . Global Health Data Exchange . http://ghdx.healthdata.org/gbd-results-tool?params=gbd-api-2019-permalink/27a7644e8ad28e739382d31e77589dd7 (3) Laursen TM, Nordentoft M, Mortensen PB. Excess early mortality in schizophrenia. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 2014;10, 425-438.
(4) WHO. Mental health systems in selected low- and middle-income countries: a WHO-AIMS cross-national analysis. WHO: Geneva, 2009 (5) Jaeschke K et al. Global estimates of service coverage for severe mental disorders: findings from the WHO Mental Health Atlas 2017 Glob Ment Health 2021;8:e27.
Related
WHO’s Comprehensive Mental Health Action Plan 2013-2030
WHO Special Initiative for Mental Health
WHO's Mental Health Gap Action Programme WHO QualityRights Project
WHO guidance on community mental health services and person-centred and rights-based approaches More on mental health Fact sheets

========================================
self-care-health-interventions
========================================
WHO defines self-care as the ability of individuals, families and communities to promote their own health, prevent disease, maintain health, and to cope with illness with or without the support of a health or care worker.
It recognizes individuals as active agents in managing their own health care in areas including health promotion; disease prevention and control; self-management; providing care to dependent persons; and rehabilitation, including palliative care. It does not replace the health care system, but instead provides additional choices and options for healthcare. Self-care interventions encompass tools that support self-care and actions that improve the care of oneself. Self-care interventions include evidence-based, high-quality medicines, devices, diagnostics and/or digital interventions that can be provided fully or partially outside formal health services and can be used with or without the direct supervision of health and care workers. Self-care actions include practices, habits, and lifestyle choices.
Some people may have good knowledge of certain self-care interventions and feel comfortable using them independently from the outset, while others may need more support and guidance before they can accept and use them independently. Self-care interventions that need initiation by a health and care worker, or additional health and care worker support , must be linked to the health system and supported by it in order to be safe and effective.
Every year 100 million people are plunged into poverty due to out-of-pocket expenditure for health. Furthermore, underserved and marginalized populations, often lack access to quality health information, services and products and face stigma and discrimination in healthcare. There is an urgent need to find innovative strategies that go beyond a conventional health sector response to address these challenges in accessing quality healthcare.
The COVID-19 pandemic highlighted the unique and critical role that self-care interventions can play in mitigating disease and saving lives through personal self-care actions, such as wearing masks and physical distancing, and national level prioritization of self-care interventions. Examples of quality, cost-effective self-care interventions include timely and accurate diagnostic testing for SARS-CoV-2 as an essential part of a comprehensive COVID-19 response strategy. Self-care actions to promote individual emotional resilience are also important for the well-being of health and care workers. Before recommending specific self-care interventions, it is important to have evidence that they are beneficial to health and cause no harm at individual and/or population levels.
Use of unregulated and substandard products, incorrect or unclear health information or lack of access to health and care workers and/or health facilities for guidance or management of side effects or complications are challenges that need to be addressed when promoting or generating demand for these interventions. Currently one of the biggest challenges is ensuring that products are available to those who need them and that they do not place added financial burden on individuals.
Assessing and ensuring an enabling environment in which self-care interventions can be made available in safe and appropriate ways must be a key initial piece of any strategy to introduce or scale-up these interventions. Creating an enabling environment not only requires action from the health sector, but also other sectors as well, for example, the education, justice and social services sectors, because self-care interventions are mostly accessed and/or used outside formal health services. Self-care interventions offer a strategy to improve universal health coverage, reach people in humanitarian situations, and improve health and well-being. WHO’s conceptual framework on self-care interventions has core elements from both “people-centred” and “health systems” approaches, underpinned by the key principles of human rights, ethics and gender equality. Self-care interventions can connect with digital platforms and technologies and be incorporated into the education of health workers for maximum scale and reach. Health literacy, including digital literacy, is also important for the uptake of self-care interventions and provides the foundation on which individuals are enabled to play an active role in improving their own health. In addition, in times of major disruptions to the normal functioning of national health systems, caused by health emergencies, self-care interventions can provide an important alternative to the usual health facility- or health and care worker-based services. WHO recognizes the value and potential contribution of self-care interventions within health systems, and the rapid advances being made in services, behaviours and information that can be initiated by individuals. WHO recommends self-care interventions through a holistic approach to the care of each person, taking account of their individual circumstances, needs and desires across their whole life course, as well as the environment they live in.
The WHO consolidated guideline on self-care interventions and framework support and promote these innovative approaches as ways to strengthen primary health care to accelerate attainment of universal health coverage and the Sustainable Development Goals . The framework and normative guideline are grounded in and advocate for a strengthened, comprehensive, people-centred approach to health and well-being, including for sexual and reproductive health and rights ; communicable diseases ; and non-communicable diseases . The WHO global guideline is relevant for all settings. When implementing the global guideline, WHO regions and countries can adapt the recommendations to the local context, considering economic conditions, existing health services and healthcare facilities, and the needs and rights of underserved populations.
Related
News
More
WHO’s work on self-care interventionsWHO's living Guideline on self-care interventions for health and well-being

========================================
sepsis
========================================
Sepsis is a life-threatening condition that happens when the body’s immune system has an extreme response to an infection, causing organ dysfunction (4). The body’s reaction causes damage to its own tissues and organs and it can lead to shock, multiple organ failure and sometimes death, especially if not recognized early and treated promptly.
Sepsis can affect anyone, but people who are older, very young, pregnant or have other health problems are at higher risk.
Common signs of sepsis include fever, fast heart rate, rapid breathing, confusion and body pain. It can lead to septic shock, multiple organ failure and death.
Sepsis is usually caused by bacterial infections but may be the result of other infections such as viruses, parasites or fungi. Its treatment requires medical care, including the use of antimicrobials, intravenous fluids and other measures. Sepsis acquired in health care settings is one of the most frequent adverse events during care delivery and affect hundreds of millions of patients worldwide every year.
Healthcare associated infections are caused by pathogens that are often resistant to drugs and can rapidly lead to deteriorating clinical conditions. Antimicrobial resistance is a major factor determining clinical unresponsiveness to treatment and rapid evolution to sepsis and septic shock. Sepsis patients with resistant pathogens have been found to have a higher risk of hospital mortality. There were an estimated 4.95 million deaths associated with antimicrobial resistance in 2019, including 1.27 million deaths directly attributable to it (5). Implementing preventive measures against infections, such as good hygiene practices, ensuring access to vaccination programmes, improved sanitation and water quality and availability, and other infection prevention and control best practices both in the community and health care settings, are key steps in reducing the occurrence of sepsis. Early diagnosis and timely and appropriate clinical management of sepsis, such as optimal antimicrobial use and fluid resuscitation, are crucial to increase the likelihood of survival. Even though the onset of sepsis can be acute and poses a short-term mortality burden, it can also be the cause of significant long-term morbidity requiring treatment and support. Thus, sepsis requires a multidisciplinary approach.
Anyone affected by an infection, severe injury, or serious non-communicable disease can progress to sepsis but vulnerable populations are at higher risk including:
Sepsis is a medical emergency. It can cause different signs and symptoms at different times. People who think they may have sepsis should seek medical care right away.
Common signs and symptoms include:
Symptoms in children include:
In children under 5 years old, it can cause difficulty feeding, frequent vomiting or lack of urination.
Sepsis can be prevented by treating infections early and through good hygiene at home and in healthcare settings.
The best way to reduce the risk of sepsis is to avoid infections. Steps include:
Hospitals and clinics should follow effective rules for infection prevention and control. Antibiotics should be used appropriately to treat infections.
Sepsis is always a serious condition but people living with HIV, tuberculosis, malaria and other infectious diseases are at higher risk.
Treatment for sepsis is most effective when started early.
Health workers watch for concerning signs and use tests to diagnose sepsis. They will then work to find the source of the infection. Early use of antimicrobials to treat bacteria, parasites, fungus or viruses is essential to improve outcomes from sepsis.
Low blood pressure is treated by intravenous fluids and sometimes medicines called vasopressors, which can increase blood pressure. Antibiotic resistance can make treatment more difficult.
Sepsis is a significant cause of maternal, neonatal and child mortality. Consequently, combating sepsis will contribute to achievement of Sustainable Development Goals targets 3.8 on quality of care, and 3.1 and 3.2 by improving mortality rates in these vulnerable populations. Sepsis can also ultimately lead to death in patients affected by HIV, tuberculosis, malaria, and other infectious diseases that are included in target 3.3. The prevention and/or appropriate diagnosis and management of sepsis is also linked to adequate vaccine coverage, quality universal health coverage, capacity to comply with the International Health Regulations, preparedness, and water and sanitation services. The challenge, however, remains how to achieve universal prevention, diagnosis and management of sepsis.
To combat this important global health threat, WHO responded with a WHO Secretariat Report and, in May 2017, the Seventieth World Health Assembly adopted Resolution WHA70.7 on improving the prevention, diagnosis and clinical management of sepsis. The key pillars of Resolution WHA70.7 are to:
In collaboration and coordination with WHO regional offices, Member States and other stakeholders, several WHO headquarters programmes are currently working on the public health impact of sepsis and providing guidance and country support on sepsis prevention, early and appropriate diagnosis, and timely and appropriate clinical management.
References
Related
News

========================================
sexually-transmitted-infections-(stis)
========================================
More than 30 different bacteria, viruses and parasites are known to be transmitted through sexual contact, including vaginal, anal and oral sex. Some STIs can also be transmitted from mother-to-child during pregnancy, childbirth and breastfeeding. Eight pathogens are linked to the greatest incidence of STIs. Of these, 4 are currently curable: syphilis, gonorrhoea, chlamydia and trichomoniasis. The other 4 are viral infections: hepatitis B, herpes simplex virus , HIV and human papillomavirus . In addition, emerging outbreaks of new infections that can be acquired by sexual contact such as mpox, Shigella sonnei, Neisseria meningitidis, Ebola and Zika, as well as re-emergence of neglected STIs such as lymphogranuloma venereum. These herald increasing challenges in the provision of adequate services for STIs prevention and control.
STIs have a profound impact on sexual and reproductive health worldwide.
More than 1 million curable STIs are acquired every day. In 2020, WHO estimated 374 million new infections with 1 of 4 STIs: chlamydia , gonorrhoea , syphilis and trichomoniasis . More than 520 million people were estimated to be living with genital herpes in 2020, and an estimated 300 million women have an HPV infection, the primary cause of cervical cancer and anal cancer among men who have sex with men. In addition, updated WHO estimates indicate that 254 million people were living with chronic hepatitis B in 2022. STIs can have serious consequences beyond the immediate impact of the infection itself.
When used correctly and consistently, condoms offer one of the most effective methods of protection against STIs, including HIV. Although highly effective, condoms do not offer protection for STIs that cause extra-genital ulcers . When possible, condoms should be used in all vaginal and anal sex.
Safe and highly effective vaccines are available for 2 viral STIs: hepatitis B and HPV. These vaccines have represented major advances in STI prevention. By the end of 2023, the HPV vaccine had been introduced as part of routine immunization programmes in 140 countries, primarily high- and middle-income countries. To eliminate cervical cancer as a public health problem globally, high coverage targets for HPV vaccination, screening and treatment of precancerous lesions, and management of cancer must be reached by 2030 and maintained at this high level for decades.
Research to develop vaccines against genital herpes is advanced, with several vaccine candidates in early clinical development. There is mounting evidence suggesting that the vaccine to prevent meningitis provides some cross-protection against gonorrhoea. More research into vaccines for chlamydia, gonorrhoea, syphilis and trichomoniasis are needed.
Other biomedical interventions to prevent some STIs include adult voluntary medical male circumcision, microbicides, and partner treatment. There are ongoing trials to evaluate the benefit of pre- and post-exposure prophylaxis of STIs and their potential safety weighed with antimicrobial resistance .
STIs are often asymptomatic. When symptoms occur, they can be non-specific. Accurate diagnostic tests for STIs are widely used in high-income countries. These are especially useful for the diagnosis of asymptomatic infections. However, they are largely unavailable in low- and middle-income countries for chlamydia and gonorrhoea. Even in countries where testing is available, it is often expensive and not widely accessible. In addition, the time it takes for results to be received is often long. As a result, follow-up can be impeded and care or treatment can be incomplete.
On the other hand, inexpensive, rapid tests are available for syphilis, hepatitis B and HIV. The rapid syphilis test and rapid dual HIV/syphilis tests are used in several resource-limited settings. Several other rapid tests are under development and have the potential to improve STI diagnosis and treatment, especially in resource-limited settings.
Effective treatment is currently available for several STIs.
AMR of STIs – in particular gonorrhoea – has increased rapidly in recent years and has reduced treatment options. The Gonococcal AMR Surveillance Programme has shown high rates of resistance to many antibiotics including quinolone, azithromycin and extended-spectrum cephalosporins, a last-line treatment (3). AMR for other STIs, like Mycoplasma genitalium, also exist but are not systematically monitored.
LMICs rely on identifying consistent, easily recognizable signs and symptoms to guide treatment, without the use of laboratory tests. This approach – syndromic management – often relies on clinical algorithms and allows health workers to diagnose a specific infection based on observed syndromes . Syndromic management is simple, assures rapid, same-day treatment, and avoids expensive or unavailable diagnostic tests for patients with symptoms. However, this approach results in overtreatment and missed treatment as the majority of STIs are asymptomatic. Thus, WHO recommends countries to enhance syndromic management by gradually incorporating laboratory testing to support diagnosis. In settings where quality assured molecular assays are available, it is recommended to treat STIs based on laboratory tests. Moreover, STI screening strategies are essential for those at higher risk of infection, such sex workers, men who have sex with men, adolescents in some settings and pregnant women.
To interrupt transmission and prevent re-infection, treating sexual partners is an important component of STI case management.
Despite considerable efforts to identify simple interventions that can reduce risky sexual behaviour, behaviour change remains a complex challenge. Information, education and counselling can improve people’s ability to recognize the symptoms of STIs and increase the likelihood that they will seek care and encourage a sexual partner to do so. Unfortunately, lack of public awareness, lack of training among health workers, and long-standing, widespread stigma around STIs remain barriers to greater and more effective use of these interventions.
People seeking screening and treatment for STIs face numerous problems. These include limited resources, stigmatization, poor quality of services and often out-of-pocket expenses. Some populations with the highest rates of STIs – such as sex workers, men who have sex with men, people who inject drugs, prison inmates, mobile populations and adolescents in high burden countries for HIV – often do not have access to adequate and friendly health services.
In many settings, STI services are often neglected and underfunded. These problems lead to difficulties in providing testing for asymptomatic infections, insufficient number of trained personnel, limited laboratory capacity and inadequate supplies of appropriate medicines.
Our work is currently guided by the Global health sector strategy on HIV, Hepatitis and Sexually Transmitted Infections, 2022–2030. Within this framework, WHO: As part of its mission, WHO supports countries to:
References
Related
News
Fact sheets
Feature stories

========================================
shingles-(herpes-zoster)
========================================
Shingles, also known as herpes zoster, is a viral infection that causes a painful rash. It is caused by the varicella-zoster virus , the same virus that causes chickenpox. After a person recovers from chickenpox, the virus remains inactive in the body. Shingles occurs when the virus reactivates later in life, often when the immune system is weakened. The rash typically appears on one side of the body, often as a single stripe of blisters. The symptoms of shingles can include pain, itching, tingling and numbness, as well as fever, headache, chills and fatigue. Shingles is not contagious, but the virus can be spread to someone who has never had chickenpox, causing chickenpox. A safe and effective vaccine is available to prevent shingles and its complications. Treatment with antiviral medications can reduce the severity and duration of shingles, especially if started early. Complications can be severe, especially for those who are immunocompromised.
Anyone who has had chickenpox can develop shingles. However, it's much more common in adults over the age of 50. The risk increases with age because the immune system tends to weaken, making it harder to keep the VZV suppressed.
Other factors that can increase the risk of shingles include:
The most common symptom of shingles is a painful rash. They include the following.
The pain associated with shingles can be intense and is often described as burning, throbbing or stabbing.
Shingles itself is not contagious, so you can’t get shingles from someone who has it.
However, you can spread the varicella-zoster virus to someone who has never had chickenpox or the chickenpox vaccine. In that case, they would develop chickenpox, not shingles.
The virus spreads through direct contact with the fluid from the shingles blisters. Once the blisters crust over, the risk of spreading the virus is very low.
To prevent spreading the virus:
It's especially important to avoid contact with:
Shingles can usually be diagnosed based on the characteristic appearance of the rash and your medical history. The unique pattern – a stripe of blisters on one side of the body – is often a clear indicator.
If the diagnosis is uncertain, especially if the rash is atypical or if there are complications, a sample from a blister can be sent to a lab for testing. This test can confirm the presence of the varicella-zoster virus .
The primary treatment for shingles involves antiviral medications, such as acyclovir, valacyclovir, or famciclovir. These medications can help:
Antiviral medications are most effective if started within 72 hours of the rash appearing.
Other treatments include:
The most common complication of shingles is postherpetic neuralgia , which is persistent nerve pain that can last for months or even years after the rash has healed. This pain can be severe and debilitating.
Other complications can include:
People with weakened immune systems are at higher risk for these severe complications.
WHO recommends that the use of the recombinant herpes zoster vaccine in a 2-dose schedule with a minimum 2-month interval between doses, for the prevention of herpes zoster in older adults and those with chronic conditions, be considered in countries where herpes zoster is an important public health problem. WHO advised countries to conduct cost-effectiveness analyses to inform decision-making.
The vaccine is highly effective and licensed for adults age 50 years and older, even if they've had shingles before.
Being vaccinated significantly reduces the risk of developing shingles and PHN. The chickenpox vaccine can reduce the risk of developing shingles later in life.
The chickenpox vaccine contains a weakened version of the varicella-zoster virus . Studies have shown that children who received the chickenpox vaccine are significantly less likely to develop shingles compared to those who contracted chickenpox naturally.
The World Health Organization’s Immunization, Vaccines and Biologicals department is responsible for targeting vaccine-preventable diseases, guiding immunization research and establishing immunization policy. WHO will issue updated recommendations on the use of chickenpox and shingles vaccine in March 2025. Related
Fact sheets
More
Highlights from the Meeting of the Strategic Advisory Group of Experts on Immunization 10–13 March 2025

========================================
snakebite-envenoming
========================================
Snake bite is a neglected public health issue in many tropical and subtropical countries. Most of these occur in Africa, Asia and Latin America. In Asia up to 2 million people are envenomed by snakes each year, while in Africa there are an estimated 435 000 to 580 000 snake bites annually that need treatment. Envenoming affects women, children and farmers in poor rural communities in low- and middle-income countries. The highest burden occurs in countries where health systems are weakest and medical resources sparse.
Bites by venomous snakes can cause acute medical emergencies involving severe paralysis that may prevent breathing, cause bleeding disorders that can lead to fatal haemorrhage, cause irreversible kidney failure and severe local tissue destruction that can cause permanent disability and limb amputation. Children may suffer more severe effects and can experience the effects more quickly than adults due to their smaller body mass.
In contrast to many other serious health conditions, a highly effective treatment exists. Most deaths and serious consequences of snake bites are entirely preventable by making safe and effective antivenoms more widely available and accessible. High quality snake antivenoms are the most effective treatment to prevent or reverse most of the venomous effects of snake bites. They are included in the WHO List of essential medicines and should be part of any primary health care package where snake bites occur.
A significant challenge in manufacturing of antivenoms is the preparation of the correct immunogens . At present very few countries have capacity to produce snake venoms of adequate quality for antivenom manufacture, and many manufacturers rely on common commercial sources. These may not properly reflect the geographical variation that occurs in the venoms of some widespread species. In addition, lack of regulatory capacity for the control of antivenoms in countries with significant snake bite problems results in an inability to assess the quality and appropriateness of the antivenoms.
A combination of factors has led to the present crisis. Poor data on the number and type of snake bites have led to difficulty in estimating needs, and deficient distribution policies have further contributed to manufacturers reducing or stopping production or increasing the prices of antivenoms. Weak regulation and the marketing of inappropriate or poor quality antivenoms has also resulted in a loss of confidence in some of the available antivenoms by clinicians, health managers and patients, which has further eroded demand.
A combination of strategic and risk-based placement of antivenoms, suitable healthcare staff training, availability of affordable, safe and effective antivenoms and equipment, along with the promotion of responsible health-seeking behaviours, can lead better outcomes for snakebite patients and a considerable reduction in the impact of snakebite-related morbidity and mortality. However, the combination of poor geographical access to and inadequate health services in remote communities hinders the chance of receiving appropriate treatment. Health systems in many countries where snake bites are common often lack the infrastructure and resources to collect robust statistical data on the problem. Assessing the true impact is further complicated by the fact that cases reported to health ministries by clinics and hospitals are often only a small proportion of the actual burden because many victims never reach primary care facilities and are therefore unreported. This is contributed to by socio-economic and cultural factors that influence treatment-seeking behaviour with many victims opting for traditional practices rather than hospital care.
Under-reporting of snake bite incidence and mortality is common. In Nepal, for example, where 90% of the population lives in rural areas, the Ministry of Health reported 480 snake bites resulting in 22 deaths for the year 2000 yet figures for the same year collected in a community-based study of one region detailed 4078 bites and 396 deaths (1). Likewise, a very large community level study of snakebite deaths in India gave a direct estimate of 45 900 deaths in 2005, which is over 30 times higher than the Government of India’s official figure (2). Revised estimates based on verbal autopsies and other data now suggest that as many as 1.2 million Indians died from snakebite envenoming between 2000–2019 (3). A comparison of hospital-registered deaths in one district of Sri Lanka to data from the Registrar-General’s office on deaths demonstrated that 62.5% of deaths from snakebite envenoming were not reported in hospital data (4).
In situations where data on snakebite envenoming are poor, it is difficult to accurately determine the need for antivenoms. This leads to under-estimation of antivenom needs by national health authorities driving down demand for manufacturers to produce antivenom products, and for some, their departure from the market. The weaknesses in some regulatory systems that leads to licensing of ineffective or incorrect products is sometimes coupled to poor procurement practices and inefficient distribution strategies, further hindering access to antivenoms and creating shortages of safe, affordable and effective products. Given low demand, several manufacturers have ceased production, and the price of some antivenom products have dramatically increased in the last 20 years, making treatment unaffordable for the majority of those who need it. Rising prices also further suppress demand, to the extent that antivenom availability has declined significantly or even disappeared in some areas. The entry into some markets of inappropriate, untested, or even fake antivenom products has also undermined confidence in antivenom therapy generally.
Many believe that unless strong and decisive action is taken quickly, antivenom supply failure is imminent in Africa and in some countries in Asia.
WHO has taken steps to raise the awareness of health authorities and policy makers on this issue. In December 2015 a programme to evaluate the potential safety and effectiveness of current antivenom products intended for use in sub-Saharan Africa was launched by WHO. This process has subsequently been extended to WHO South-East Asia and to the Eastern Mediterranean Regions. The results of this detailed technical and laboratory assessment provide regulators and procurement agencies with informed guidance on which antivenoms best suit their needs. Following a request by several UN member states, WHO formally listed snakebite envenoming as a highest priority neglected tropical disease in June 2017.
A Snakebite Envenoming Working Group established that same year was tasked with informing the development of a strategic WHO road map on snakebites. This strategy focuses on a 50% reduction in mortality and disability caused by snakebite envenoming by 2030. This aim will be achieved through four key objectives:
A primer on the WHO response was published in the journal PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases in February 2019 (5).
WHO is working closely with a range of partners to ensure the successful implementation of the road map. The strategy focuses on activities in countries and regions where snakebite envenoming occurs, supported by technical units from WHO. A number of large capacity building projects have already been launched. Particular attention is being focused on the development of a community engagement toolkit (6), specific interventions to improve access to WHO-recommended antivenoms (7), strengthen regulation and control of antivenom products and inform rational evidence-based design , improved data collection and analysis , estimate snake distribution and the risk of snakebite incidence among vulnerable populations using high-resolution geospatial models (8), and integration of snakebite envenoming into the national health plans of affected countries. WHO urges regulators, producers, researchers, clinicians, national and regional health authorities, and international and community organizations to work together to improve the availability of reliable epidemiological data on snake bites, the regulatory control of antivenoms and their distribution policies.
Two tools to help guide the development of appropriate antivenoms and their strategic placement have been launched:
These tools will assist:
References
1. Sharma SK. Snake bites and dog bites in Nepal: community based studies on snake bites and dog bites. Department of Medicine, B P Koirala Institute of Health Sciences, presentation made at the WHO first Consultative Meeting on Rabies and Envenomings, Geneva, 10 January 2007.
2. Mohapatra B, Warrell DA, Suraweera W, Bhatia P, Dhingra N, Jotkar RM, Rodriguez PS, Mishra K, Whitaker R, Jha P. Snakebite Mortality in India: A Nationally Representative Mortality Survey. PLOS Negl Trop Dis. 2011. 5(4): e1018
3. Suraweera W, Warrell D, Whitaker R, Menon G, Rodrigues R, Sze HF, et al. Trends in snakebite deaths in India from 2000 to 2019 in a nationally representative study. Elife. 2020. 9: e54076.
4. Fox S, Rathuwithana AC, Kasturiratne A, Lalloo DG, de Silva HJ. Underestimation of snakebite mortality by hospital statistics in the Monaragala District of Sri Lanka. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 2006. 100(7): 693–695.
5. Williams DJ, Faiz MA, Abela-Ridder B, Ainsworth S, Bulfone TC, Nickerson AD, et al. Strategy for a globally coordinated response to a priority neglected tropical disease: Snakebite envenoming. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2019. 13(2): e0007059.
6. Moos B, Williams D, Bolon I, Mupfasoni D, Abela-Ridder B, de Castaneda RR. A scoping review of current practices on community engagement in rural East Africa: Recommendations for snakebite envenoming. Toxicon: X. 2021 Sep 1;11:100073.
7. Potet J, Beran D, Ray N, Alcoba G, Habib AG, Iliyasu G, Waldmann B, Ralph R, Faiz MA, Monteiro WM, Sachett JD. Access to antivenoms in the developing world: A multidisciplinary analysis. Toxicon: X. 2021 Nov 1;12:100086.
8. Pintor AF, Ray N, Longbottom J, Bravo-Vega CA, Yousefi M, Murray KA, Ediriweera DS, Diggle PJ. Addressing the global snakebite crisis with geo-spatial analyses–Recent advances and future direction. Toxicon: X. 2021 Sep 1;11:100076.
Related
News
Documents

========================================
social-determinants-of-health
========================================
The social determinants of health are the conditions in which people are born, grow, work, live and age, and the wider forces that shape the conditions of daily life. Most of our health is determined by these non-medical root causes of ill health, which include quality education, access to nutritious food, and decent housing and working conditions.
Wider forces include economic policies and systems, development agendas, social norms, social policies and political systems. Social determinants of health matter because addressing them not only helps prevents illness but also promotes healthy lives and equity.
Health follows a social gradient whereby the more deprived the area in which people live, the lower their income, the fewer their years of education, the worse their health and the fewer healthy years they can expect to live.
Governance processes need to ensure that policies and systems are developed and implemented to ensure everyone can realize the conditions needed for a healthy and decent life. Social injustice continues to kill on a grand scale, in both high- and low-income countries, as the world fails to tackle the non-medical root causes of ill health. Social determinants of health equity outweigh genetic influences or health-care access in influencing health outcomes.
Health inequities stem from how society allocates resources and opportunities, reinforced by political choices and leadership.
WHO calls for collective action from national and local governments and leaders within health, academia, research, civil society and the private sector to take forward the World Report on Social Determinants of Health Equity action areas:
The WHO is committed to supporting countries in developing and implementing key policies that address SDH to reduce health inequities. WHO has developed an updated World Report and launched the Operational Framework for Monitoring SDHE. With partners, WHO has also established the Special Initiative for Action of Social Determinants of Health for Advancing Health Equity, with the aim of deepening work to integrate health equity into social and economic policies in regions and countries. WHO has launched the Global Knowledge Network for Health Equity to connect and share knowledge on best practices among practitioners and country officials, as well as launching updated guidance for implementing Health-in-All-Policies approaches and a WHO Academy online training course.
References
Related
News
Fact sheets

========================================
sodium-reduction
========================================
The burden of unhealthy diets constitutes a major public health and development challenge worldwide. Urgent action is required to modify the over-production and over-consumption of foods and beverages that do not have a healthy nutritional profile, mainly industry manufactured food. Of greatest concern is excess consumption of sodium, sugars and unhealthy fats, particularly trans-fatty acids and saturated fatty acids, and low consumption of whole grains, pulses, vegetables, and fruits. In many high-income countries, and increasingly in low- and middle-income countries, a significant proportion of sodium in the diet comes from processed foods. An estimated 1.89 million deaths each year are associated with consuming too much sodium, a well-established cause of raised blood pressure and increased risk of cardiovascular disease (2).
Reducing sodium intake is one of the most cost-effective ways to improve health and reduce the burden of noncommunicable diseases, as it can avert many cardiovascular events and deaths at very low total programme costs. WHO recommends several sodium-related best buy policies as practical steps that countries can take to prevent cardiovascular disease and its associated costs. These include lowering sodium content in foods; implementing front-of-pack labelling; mass media campaigns; and public food procurement and service.
WHO has identified a set of evidence-based best buy interventions to tackle noncommunicable diseases. It undertaken immediately, these interventions are expected to accelerate results in terms of lives saved, healthy years of life gained, cases of disease prevented, and costs avoided. There are 4 best buys for sodium reduction: The development, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of sodium reduction policies should be government-led and safeguarded against possible conflicts of interest.
WHO has developed a Sodium Country Score Card to monitor countries' progress in making national commitments and in taking a multifaceted approach to implement policies to reduce sodium intake.
Convert the sodium listed on food products into grams of salt and vice versa.
Sodium (Na) to salt conversion E.g., 5 g salt = 2000 mg sodium = 87 mmol sodium = 87 mEq sodium
WHO guidelines on sodium provide thresholds for healthy intake and outline measures for improving diets to prevent noncommunicable diseases in adults and children.
The Global strategy on diet, physical activity, and health was adopted in 2004 by the World Health Assembly. It calls on governments, WHO, international partners, the private sector and civil society to act at global, regional, and local levels to support healthy diets and physical activity. In 2010, the World Health Assembly endorsed a set of recommendations on the marketing of foods and non-alcoholic beverages to children. These recommendations guide countries in designing new policies and strengthening existing ones to reduce the impact of unhealthy food marketing on children. The WHO Regional Offices have developed nutrient profile models that countries can use as a tool to implement these marketing recommendations.
In 2011, world leaders committed to reducing people’s exposure to unhealthy diets. The commitment was made through a Political Declaration of the High-level Meeting of the United Nations General Assembly on the Prevention and Control of NCDs.
In 2012, the World Health Assembly adopted 6 global nutrition targets, including the reduction of stunting, wasting and overweight in children, the improvement of breastfeeding and the reduction of anaemia and low birth weight.
In 2013, the World Health Assembly agreed on 9 global voluntary targets for the prevention and control of NCDs, which include a halt to the rise in diabetes and obesity and a 30% relative reduction in the intake of salt by 2025. The Global action plan for the prevention and control of noncommunicable diseases 2013–2020 gives guidance and a menu of policy options for Member States, WHO and other UN agencies to achieve these targets. The timeline for achieving the targets was extended to 2030 by a World Health Assembly decision in 2019 to ensure its alignment with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
In 2023, the first Global report on sodium intake reduction was published based on the Sodium Country Score Card. The report aims to monitor progress and identify areas for action in implementing sodium reduction policies and other measures within Member States and across WHO regions and World Bank income groups.
References
Related
News
Fact sheets

========================================
soil-transmitted-helminth-infections
========================================
Soil-transmitted helminth infections are among the most common infections worldwide with an estimated 1.5 billion infected people or 24% of the world’s population. These infections affect the poorest and most deprived communities with poor access to clean water, sanitation and hygiene in tropical and subtropical areas, with the highest prevalence reported from sub-Saharan Africa, China, South America and Asia. They are transmitted by eggs present in human faeces, which in turn contaminate soil in areas where sanitation is poor. Over 260 million preschool-age children, 654 million school-age children,108 million adolescent girls and 138.8 million pregnant and lactating women live in areas where these parasites are intensively transmitted, and are in need of treatment and preventive interventions.
Globally over 600 million people are estimated to be infected by S. stercoralis; however, since also this parasite is transmitted in areas where sanitation is poor, its geographical distribution overlaps with the one of the other soil-transmitted helminthiases.
The main species that infect people are the roundworm , the whipworm and hookworms . These STH species are normally addressed as a group because they need similar diagnostic procedures and respond to the same medicines.
Strongyloides stercoralis is an intestinal helminth with peculiar characteristics: the parasite requires different diagnostic methods than other soil-transmitted helminthiases, and for this reason is frequently not identified. In addition, the parasite is not sensitive to albendazole or mebendazole and therefore not impacted by large-scale preventive treatment campaigns targeting other soil-transmitted helminthiases.
Soil-transmitted helminths are transmitted by eggs that are passed in the faeces of infected people. Adult worms live in the intestine where they produce thousands of eggs each day. In areas that lack adequate sanitation, these eggs contaminate the soil. This can happen in several ways:
In addition, hookworm eggs hatch in the soil, releasing larvae that mature into a form that can actively penetrate the skin. People become infected with hookworm primarily by walking barefoot on the contaminated soil.
There is no direct person-to-person transmission, or infection from fresh faeces, because eggs passed in faeces need about 3 weeks to mature in the soil before they become infective.
A. lumbricoides, T. trichiura and hookworms do not multiply in the human host; re-infection occurs only as a result of contact with infective stages in the environment. S. stercoralis can reproduce in the host, and in immunocompromised individuals its uncontrolled multiplication can be fatal.
Soil-transmitted helminths impair the nutritional status of the people they infect in multiple ways.
Morbidity is related to the number of worms harboured. People with infections of light intensity usually do not suffer from the infection. Heavier infections can cause a range of symptoms including intestinal manifestations , malnutrition, general malaise and weakness, and impaired growth and physical development.
Infections of very high intensity can cause intestinal obstruction that should be treated surgically.
S. stercoralis may cause dermatological and gastro-intestinal morbidity and is also known to be associated with chronic malnutrition in children. In case of reduced host immunity, the parasite can cause the hyperinfection/dissemination syndrome that is invariably fatal if not promptly and properly cured and is often fatal despite the treatment.
In 2001, delegates at the World Health Assembly unanimously endorsed a resolution urging endemic countries to start seriously tackling worms, specifically schistosomiasis and soil-transmitted helminths.
The strategy for control of soil-transmitted helminth infections is to control morbidity through the periodic treatment of at-risk people living in endemic areas. People at risk are:
WHO recommends periodic medicinal treatment without previous individual diagnosis to all at-risk people living in endemic areas. This intervention reduces morbidity by reducing the worm burden. In addition:
Periodical treatment aims to reduce and maintain the intensity of infection low, and to protect infected at-risk populations from morbidity.
Deworming can be easily integrated with child health days or vitamin A supplementation programmes for preschool children, Human Papilloma Vaccine programme for adolescent girls or integrated with school health programmes. WHO added the control of morbidity due to S. stercoralis as an objective for 2030. This is possible because of the current availability of pre-qualified ivermectin at affordable cost. Distribution of ivermectin can be organized through the platforms used to control the other soil-transmitted helminthiases. Pilot interventions are presently in place to refine the strategy and evaluate its impact.
In 2021, over 500 million children were treated with anthelminthic medicines in endemic countries, corresponding to 62% of all children at risk. In addition, more than 99 million of women of reproductive age were treated with albendazole through the lymphatic filariasis elimination programmes. Between 2010 and 2019, the number of Disease Adjusted Life Years lost every year because of STH reduced by more than 50%, which correspond to the period of scaling up of preventive chemotherapy (PC) for STH in endemic countries.
WHO recommend to endemic countries to measure the success of their programmes through epidemiological assessments after 5 to 6 years of PC implementation with effective treatment coverage of >=75% and to adjust their treatment frequency. The indicators to monitor the impact are the prevalence of any STH and the prevalence of moderate and heavy intensity.
The WHO recommended medicines – albendazole and mebendazole – are effective, inexpensive and easy to administer by non-medical personnel . They have been through extensive safety testing and have been used in millions of people with few and minor side-effects.
Both albendazole and mebendazole are donated to national ministries of health through WHO in all endemic countries for the treatment of all children of school age.
Generic ivermectin for the control of S. stercoralis has been available at affordable price since 2021. There are six WHO 2030 global targets for soil-transmitted helminthiases:
In order to achieve the 2030 NTD roadmap, WHO works with Member States and partners to achieve and maintain effective preventative chemotherapy coverage for STH in all at-risk groups, to measure the impact of the interventions in countries that have been implementing the programme for more than 5 years and to advocate for an integration of STH control in primary health care for the sustainability of the programme.
Related
News

========================================
spinal-cord-injury
========================================
Spinal cord injury
The term spinal cord injury refers to damage to the spinal cord resulting from trauma or non-traumatic causes like tumors, degenerative and vascular conditions, infections, toxins or birth defects.
The extent of SCI related impairment depends on injury severity and location in the spinal cord. SCI results in complete or incomplete loss of sensory and/or motor functions below injury level. In paraplegia arm functions are preserved; in tetraplegia they are affected. Autonomic nervous system dysfunction affecting diverse functions can occur at any level of injury.
Inappropriate management of SCI related impairments and secondary conditions often causes premature mortality. SCI can diminish the capacity to perform daily activities, including walking, using one’s hands, physiological emptying of bowel/bladder or washing and dressing oneself. Limitations are compounded by misconceptions, negative attitudes and physical barriers to basic mobility, restricting independence and full societal participation. SCI is a major cause of long-term disability, accounting for over 4.5 million years of life lived with disability in 2021.
Importantly, many restrictions in performing activities and participating in meaningful life areas do not result from the condition itself, but from insufficient or inadequate medical care, rehabilitation and assistive technologies access, a high economic burden, and from barriers in the physical, social and policy environments. For example, globally, only 5–35% have wheelchair access.
Global estimates suggest that in 2021, approximately 15.4 million people were living with SCI.
Males are more commonly affected by SCI than females, with consistently higher prevalence and YLDs attributed to this demographic.
Life expectancy in people with SCI strongly correlates with neurological impairment and preventable secondary conditions. People with SCI often die earlier because of health system factors such as insufficient access to or poor quality health services. For people with SCI, the in‑hospital mortality rate is nearly three times higher in low- and middle-income countries than in high-income countries.
Misconceptions, negative attitudes and mobility barriers prevent many individuals from full societal participation. Children with SCI are less likely than their peers to start school, and once enrolled, less likely to advance. Adults with SCI face similar barriers to economic participation, with unemployment rates exceeding 60%.
Many people with SCI, their carers and families face substantial social and economic consequences. While existing data limit global cost estimates of SCI, its economic burden is significant. Indirect costs often exceed direct costs, which are highest in the first year after SCI onset, with much of the cost borne by people with SCI. Depending on injury severity and location, people with SCI can experience SCI is often associated with a risk of developing complications, including debilitating and potentially life-threatening secondary conditions, such as Furthermore, people with SCI may develop clinical signs of depression, negatively impacting functional improvements and overall health. Mortality risk is highest in the first year after injury, remaining high compared to the general population. Injury level and severity, availability of timely, quality medical care, transfer method to hospital after injury and time to hospital admission are important factors. Traumatic SCIs from falls and road traffic accidents are the leading cause of SCI, followed by violence and work or sports-related injuries. Emergencies can also result in surges in SCI. Earthquakes, for example, can cause increases in SCI due to blunt trauma; conflicts may cause surges in penetrating injuries. Non-traumatic SCIs are also increasing, specifically in ageing populations, given increases in non-communicable diseases such as tumors, degenerative and vascular conditions that can cause spinal cord damage.
Effective interventions are available to prevent many causes of traumatic SCI. These include improvements in road infrastructure, vehicles and people’s road behaviors to avoid road traffic accidents, window guards to prevent falls, policies to thwart the harmful use of alcohol and access to firearms to reduce violence, and domestic violence and suicide prevention strategies . Prevention of non-traumatic SCI includes early diagnosis and treatment of the underlying health condition. The prevention, early diagnosis and treatment of SCI related secondary conditions are essential to increase life expectancy.
Timely access to prehospital management, emergency and acute care and rehabilitation is essential to ensure survival and restore optimal levels of functioning, aimed at minimizing long-term disability. Long-term management is indispensable to maintain functioning and to prevent secondary conditions and premature mortality. Essential measures include the following:
specialized knowledge on SCI and skills among medical care and rehabilitation providers.
Persons with disabilities such as SCI continue to experience substantial health inequities. According to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, Member States must ensure that persons with SCI can access the same range, quality and standard of free or affordable health care and social support as others. Addressing inequities is essential to realize this mandate.
Appropriate self-management is indispensable to manage SCI related impairments, restore optimal levels of functioning and prevent secondary conditions. Self-management requires competencies to apply effective self-care strategies as independently as possible and implement a healthy lifestyle. However, people with more severe SCI often require ongoing care and support provided largely by informal carers. Challenges for carers include stress, role strain, financial burden, social isolation, lack of community services and bereavement in the event of loss of loved ones. Caring for a person with SCI may affect the carer’s own health, well-being and social relationships. Effective carer support and self-care interventions for health can significantly alleviate carer strain and enhance quality of care and participation of people with SCI.
Self-care interventions provided by health workers aim to empower people with SCI and their families to care for their health, prevent secondary conditions, maintain optimal levels of functioning, and foster coping strategies. WHO works across the spectrum from primary prevention of SCI, improving trauma care, strengthening health and rehabilitation services, and supporting inclusion of people with SCI. Major initiatives include the following. Related
Fact sheets

========================================
sporotrichosis
========================================
Sporotrichosis is usually a sporadically occurring infection seen in tropical and subtropical climates. It is caused by a number of different fungi of the genus Sporothrix, including S. schenckii, S. globose, S. mexicana and S. brasiliensis. The fungi exist naturally on plant materials. They infect people through breaks in the skin and invade deeper parts of the skin layer. S. brasiliensis infects cats and other mammals and can spread from them to humans. This has resulted in a large and progressive outbreak spreading within Brazil and several adjacent countries in South America. Sporotrichosis leads to painful and unsightly skin lesions as well as social stigma. Outbreaks of sporotrichosis has also been reported in China associated with flooding. There are localized areas of hyperendemicity in Guatemala, Mexico, Peru and South Africa. In South Africa, sporotrichosis has been associated with an outbreak of infection in miners following contact with contaminated wooden pit props. Sporotrichosis can be treated successfully with antifungal drugs such as itraconazole and terbinafine.
Sporotrichosis is a subcutaneous fungal infection seen in tropical and subtropical climates although sporadic cases can occur in more temperate climates. The largest number of cases are found in Central and South America , Southern USA, Africa, China and South-East Asia. Clusters of cases are found in some areas. These have been associated with contaminated wood, e.g. material used in mines, or with flooding, but often the reason for outbreaks in one area is unknown. Sporotrichosis affects otherwise healthy individuals, often those working in agriculture or with plants or plant materials, such as packing straw or thatching. It also affects individuals exposed to the fungus during leisure outdoor activities associated with skin abrasions. Contact with domestic or feral cats, particularly among veterinarians and others looking after cats, may also lead to infection in some regions.
Sporotrichosis most commonly presents with nodules and plaques on exposed skin sites such as the face, legs or arms. These may be restricted to one site . Alternatively, the nodules may be arranged in lines along the course of lymphatic vessels , known as sporotrichoid spread. This form is typical of sporotrichosis but a similar clinical pattern can occur with other neglected tropical diseases such as cutaneous leishmaniasis. Both nodules and plaques can ulcerate. Sporotrichosis can also affect the mucous membranes such as the mouth and other sites including the eyes.
When people get sick from cat-related infections, they might develop additional skin rashes because their immune system reacts to the germs. This reaction can cause things like red patches on the skin, known as erythema multiforme. In some cases, there can be a more widespread rash with three or more lesions appearing on different parts of the skin. Rarely, deep forms of sporotrichosis can occur that can lead to arthritis, respiratory infection and even meningitis. There are two ways to acquire cutaneous sporotrichosis, both of which occur by traumatic inoculation of the fungi through the skin. The classic clinical presentation is transmitted through plant debris and the second is caused by animal transmission. Scratches from cats are a common source of the latter but inoculation through a wound site or broken skin can also occur. Transmission via contact with exudate from infected cats has also been reported. The zoonotic disease is a source of public health concern because of the continuing and spreading outbreak in South America. The infection responds to treatment with oral itraconazole or terbinafine. Saturated solutions of potassium iodide taken by mouth have also been used but require dispensing pharmacy skills to make up the medicine. Intravenous amphotericin B can be used for the rare systemic forms of sporotrichosis. There are no recognized preventive measures apart from early identification and treatment of infected cats. The use of gloves, protective clothing and shoes when handling roses, hay and sphagnum moss have the potential to reduce infections.
Diagnosis depends on demonstrating the characteristic fungal cells either in scrapings or curettings from lesions or biopsy material. In many cases there are few visible organisms in lesions and here culture or molecular diagnosis are more helpful in confirming the diagnosis. All involve the deployment of laboratory diagnostic skills and appropriate training of laboratory staff.
The cost of medicines purchased by patients in resource poor settings is also a challenge for successful completion of treatment. Providing months of treatment to cats is often too expensive for patients to help control zoonotic spread. Sporotrichosis is a disabling disease that reduces social interaction. Infections caused by cat-acquired S. brasiliensis infections often require longer courses of treatment, e.g. 3–4 months. Control of this variant also requires collaboration between medical and veterinary teams. The association with some outbreaks of sporotrichosis with weather events leading to flooding suggest that occurrence of this mycosis may be affected by climate change. Sporotrichosis is listed by WHO as a neglected tropical disease and forms part of the evolving programme for Skin NTDs. Key work involves developing detailed prevalence data through mapping, the search for new rapid diagnostic assays available at point of care and the search for new medicines. Sporotrichosis is also included in WHO training material dedicated to skin NTDs, in the form of an online course , a training manual and a mobile app. Control of the outbreak of cat-associated sporotrichosis in South America is a public health priority.
Related
Fact sheets

========================================
substandard-and-falsified-medical-products
========================================
Key factsSubstandard and falsified medical products affect people all around the world. At least 1 in 10 medicines in low- and middle-income countries are substandard or falsified. Countries spend an estimated US$ 30.5 billion per year on substandard and falsified medical products.Substandard and falsified medical products are often sold online or in informal markets.OverviewSubstandard products are those that do not meet quality standards and specifications, often due to poor manufacturing practices or inadequate quality control. Falsified medical products deliberately misrepresent their identity, composition or source. These products are often created and distributed with the intent to deceive consumers for financial gain.Substandard and falsified medical products pose significant threats to public health globally. They can be ineffective at treating the illness, as they may contain incorrect ingredients or incorrect dosages. They can even be directly harmful to patients if they contain contaminants or toxic substances. They may be indirectly harmful through increased risk of antimicrobial resistance. Both substandard and falsified medical products put patients’ health at risk, undermine the effectiveness of health systems, and erode trust in health and care providers. Sometimes, certain problems with health affect some countries more than others. These problems can happen in places where everyone does not have access to healthcare. When that happens, people might buy medical products from places that are not permitted to sell them. Even in wealthy countries, the global trade and transportation of medicines pose significant risks. These risks stem from how medicines are manufactured and distributed across the world. To mitigate this, coordinated efforts are needed; governments, healthcare professionals and manufacturers must collaborate to enforce regulations and educate the public on safety measures.Scope of the problemSubstandard and falsified medical products are a significant global health problem, impacting millions of people and compromising health systems worldwide. These products can be found in all countries, impacting all types of medical products, including life-saving treatments like vaccines, antibiotics and cancer therapies. In 2017, the World Health Organization estimated that 1 in 10 medicines in low- and middle-income countries failed quality control tests, suggesting the product is substandard or falsified. This can lead to serious health risks, treatment failures and even death.The economic burden is also substantial, with billions of dollars lost annually due to ineffective treatments, increased healthcare costs and loss of productivity. For patients, the consequences are dire: relying on ineffective or harmful products can exacerbate illnesses, lead to prolonged suffering and contribute to drug resistance, making diseases harder to treat. The issue of substandard and falsified medical products is pervasive and challenging to address due to sophisticated falsification techniques that are difficult to detect and insufficient national resources to respond effectively. This problem significantly undermines health systems, erodes trust in healthcare, and results in financial losses for both patients and legitimate industries. Increasingly sophisticated networks manufacture these products, exploiting the demand for affordable medical treatments. The rise in online sales through unauthorized sites has further exacerbated the issue, allowing falsified products to reach consumers more easily. Tackling this problem necessitates robust legal frameworks, regional and international cooperation, heightened public awareness and stronger enforcement measures. These steps are crucial to safeguarding the integrity of health systems and ensuring the availability of safe and effective medical products for prevention, treatment and care.Global cooperation, robust regulations, legal frameworks and public awareness are essential to tackle the issue and ensure that all people have access to safe and effective medical products.Who is at risk?Everyone is at risk of encountering substandard and falsified medical products, including vulnerable populationscountries lacking social protectioncountries with weaker health systems individuals buying medical products from unauthorized sources countries with a disrupted supply chaincountries with an increased demand of specific medical products.ImpactSubstandard and falsified (SF) medical products severely impact public health, leading to severe and often fatal consequences. Patients may unknowingly consume medications that contain toxic substances or incorrect dosages, resulting in poisoning, treatment failure, and exacerbation of diseases. These products can accelerate the spread of drug-resistant infections, making once-treatable conditions deadly. The economic toll may also be serious as families deplete their savings on ineffective treatments, and health systems waste precious resources. Trust in healthcare providers and systems erodes, leaving communities vulnerable and fearful. The global reach of this issue means no region is spared, with both developed and developing countries grappling with the devastating impacts.ChallengesAddressing substandard and falsified medical products is challenging due to limited resources and infrastructure in many regions, especially in low- and middle-income countries. Falsifiers are using sophisticated methods that make detection difficult. The rise of online purchases and informal markets makes it hard to monitor and control the distribution of these products. Additionally, the vast number of medical products in circulation worldwide makes comprehensive regulation and monitoring a significant challenge.Key drivers include:weak regulatory systems: insufficient regulatory oversight, lack of enforcement, punitive actions to deter offenders and inadequate inspection mechanisms;supply chain complexity: long and complex supply chains with multiple intermediaries increase the risk of product tampering and substitution;lack of access to affordable medicines: elevated prices and limited access to authentic medicines compel consumers to seek more affordable alternatives, often from unregulated and potentially unsafe sources ;consumer awareness and education: lack of awareness among consumers about the risks of substandard and falsified medical products and how to identify them; andcorruption: within regulatory bodies, law enforcement, and the supply chain, corruption can facilitate the production and distribution of SF products.Addressing the issue of substandard and falsified medical products is a complex and multifaceted challenge requiring coordinated global efforts, significant investments in regulatory and enforcement capabilities, and sustained commitment from all stakeholders involved.Prevention, detection and responsePreventing, detecting and responding to substandard and falsified medical products require robust regulatory systems which enforce the highest possible quality standards for medical products. Prevent the manufacture, sale and consumption of substandard and falsified medical products.Implement systems to detect any substandard and falsified medical products already in the supply chain.Respond quickly and proportionately to any incident detected, in ways that safeguard patients and the supply chain, take appropriate action whilst not causing unnecessary shortages.Governments must ensure that regulations and legal frameworks keep pace with technological developments and the regulatory standards are upheld and enforced in a consistent and transparent manner.Collaboration, reliance and information sharing between countries should be supported by governments to ensure both risks and best practices are shared. Technological solutions, for example handheld spectrometer devices, mobile apps, blockchain, track-and-trace systems and laboratory methods – when combined with robust regulatory frameworks and international cooperation – significantly enhance the detection and prevention of SF medical product. Public awareness campaigns are crucial to educate people about the risks of buying medical products from unauthorized sources.It is crucial to support local healthcare providers and ensure they have access to safe, affordable medical products. This involves strengthening healthcare infrastructure, providing training and resources and implementing policies that guarantee the availability of genuine, cost-effective medicines for all communities.WHO responseWHO addresses the issue of substandard and falsified medical products through coordinated political and technical responses.Political response: Member State mechanism The Member State mechanism was established to facilitate global collaboration among WHO Member States. It aims to promote and reinforce national and international efforts to prevent, detect and respond to substandard and falsified medical products. This mechanism allows member states to share information, experiences and best practices, ensuring a unified and effective global response. It also supports the development of regulatory frameworks, capacity building and the promotion of legal measures to combat these threats to public health.Technical response: Global Surveillance and Monitoring SystemThe WHO Global Surveillance and Monitoring System is a comprehensive initiative launched in 2013 to enhance the detection, reporting and response to substandard and falsified medical products. By providing national regulatory authorities with a robust information portal, the GSMS facilitates the sharing of data on suspect products, enabling timely alerts and coordinated actions across borders. This system is vital to improve the accuracy and speed of identifying these products, supporting evidence-based policymaking, and strengthening regulatory capacities globally. Its collaborative approach ensures that health systems are better equipped to protect public health and maintain the integrity of medical supplies.Together, the Member State mechanism and GSMS provide a comprehensive framework for addressing the complex challenge of substandard and falsified medical products, enhancing global public health safety.
Substandard products are those that do not meet quality standards and specifications, often due to poor manufacturing practices or inadequate quality control. Falsified medical products deliberately misrepresent their identity, composition or source. These products are often created and distributed with the intent to deceive consumers for financial gain.
Substandard and falsified medical products pose significant threats to public health globally. They can be ineffective at treating the illness, as they may contain incorrect ingredients or incorrect dosages. They can even be directly harmful to patients if they contain contaminants or toxic substances. They may be indirectly harmful through increased risk of antimicrobial resistance. Both substandard and falsified medical products put patients’ health at risk, undermine the effectiveness of health systems, and erode trust in health and care providers. Sometimes, certain problems with health affect some countries more than others. These problems can happen in places where everyone does not have access to healthcare. When that happens, people might buy medical products from places that are not permitted to sell them. Even in wealthy countries, the global trade and transportation of medicines pose significant risks. These risks stem from how medicines are manufactured and distributed across the world. To mitigate this, coordinated efforts are needed; governments, healthcare professionals and manufacturers must collaborate to enforce regulations and educate the public on safety measures.
Substandard and falsified medical products are a significant global health problem, impacting millions of people and compromising health systems worldwide. These products can be found in all countries, impacting all types of medical products, including life-saving treatments like vaccines, antibiotics and cancer therapies. In 2017, the World Health Organization estimated that 1 in 10 medicines in low- and middle-income countries failed quality control tests, suggesting the product is substandard or falsified. This can lead to serious health risks, treatment failures and even death.
The economic burden is also substantial, with billions of dollars lost annually due to ineffective treatments, increased healthcare costs and loss of productivity. For patients, the consequences are dire: relying on ineffective or harmful products can exacerbate illnesses, lead to prolonged suffering and contribute to drug resistance, making diseases harder to treat. The issue of substandard and falsified medical products is pervasive and challenging to address due to sophisticated falsification techniques that are difficult to detect and insufficient national resources to respond effectively. This problem significantly undermines health systems, erodes trust in healthcare, and results in financial losses for both patients and legitimate industries. Increasingly sophisticated networks manufacture these products, exploiting the demand for affordable medical treatments. The rise in online sales through unauthorized sites has further exacerbated the issue, allowing falsified products to reach consumers more easily. Tackling this problem necessitates robust legal frameworks, regional and international cooperation, heightened public awareness and stronger enforcement measures. These steps are crucial to safeguarding the integrity of health systems and ensuring the availability of safe and effective medical products for prevention, treatment and care.
Global cooperation, robust regulations, legal frameworks and public awareness are essential to tackle the issue and ensure that all people have access to safe and effective medical products.
Everyone is at risk of encountering substandard and falsified medical products, including Substandard and falsified (SF) medical products severely impact public health, leading to severe and often fatal consequences. Patients may unknowingly consume medications that contain toxic substances or incorrect dosages, resulting in poisoning, treatment failure, and exacerbation of diseases. These products can accelerate the spread of drug-resistant infections, making once-treatable conditions deadly. The economic toll may also be serious as families deplete their savings on ineffective treatments, and health systems waste precious resources. Trust in healthcare providers and systems erodes, leaving communities vulnerable and fearful. The global reach of this issue means no region is spared, with both developed and developing countries grappling with the devastating impacts.
Addressing substandard and falsified medical products is challenging due to limited resources and infrastructure in many regions, especially in low- and middle-income countries. Falsifiers are using sophisticated methods that make detection difficult. The rise of online purchases and informal markets makes it hard to monitor and control the distribution of these products. Additionally, the vast number of medical products in circulation worldwide makes comprehensive regulation and monitoring a significant challenge.
Key drivers include:
Addressing the issue of substandard and falsified medical products is a complex and multifaceted challenge requiring coordinated global efforts, significant investments in regulatory and enforcement capabilities, and sustained commitment from all stakeholders involved.
Preventing, detecting and responding to substandard and falsified medical products require robust regulatory systems which enforce the highest possible quality standards for medical products. Governments must ensure that regulations and legal frameworks keep pace with technological developments and the regulatory standards are upheld and enforced in a consistent and transparent manner.
Collaboration, reliance and information sharing between countries should be supported by governments to ensure both risks and best practices are shared. Technological solutions, for example handheld spectrometer devices, mobile apps, blockchain, track-and-trace systems and laboratory methods – when combined with robust regulatory frameworks and international cooperation – significantly enhance the detection and prevention of SF medical product. Public awareness campaigns are crucial to educate people about the risks of buying medical products from unauthorized sources.
It is crucial to support local healthcare providers and ensure they have access to safe, affordable medical products. This involves strengthening healthcare infrastructure, providing training and resources and implementing policies that guarantee the availability of genuine, cost-effective medicines for all communities.
WHO addresses the issue of substandard and falsified medical products through coordinated political and technical responses.
Political response: Member State mechanism The Member State mechanism was established to facilitate global collaboration among WHO Member States. It aims to promote and reinforce national and international efforts to prevent, detect and respond to substandard and falsified medical products. This mechanism allows member states to share information, experiences and best practices, ensuring a unified and effective global response. It also supports the development of regulatory frameworks, capacity building and the promotion of legal measures to combat these threats to public health.
Technical response: Global Surveillance and Monitoring System
The WHO Global Surveillance and Monitoring System is a comprehensive initiative launched in 2013 to enhance the detection, reporting and response to substandard and falsified medical products. By providing national regulatory authorities with a robust information portal, the GSMS facilitates the sharing of data on suspect products, enabling timely alerts and coordinated actions across borders. This system is vital to improve the accuracy and speed of identifying these products, supporting evidence-based policymaking, and strengthening regulatory capacities globally. Its collaborative approach ensures that health systems are better equipped to protect public health and maintain the integrity of medical supplies.
Together, the Member State mechanism and GSMS provide a comprehensive framework for addressing the complex challenge of substandard and falsified medical products, enhancing global public health safety.
Related
News
Fact sheets

========================================
sugars-and-dental-caries
========================================
Dental caries is a major public health problem globally and is the most widespread noncommunicable disease . It is also the most prevalent condition included in the 2015 Global Burden of Disease Study, ranking first for decay of permanent teeth and 12th for deciduous teeth . Dental caries can be prevented by avoiding dietary free sugars. Moreover, dental caries is largely preventable through simple and cost-effective population-wide and individual interventions, whereas treatment is costly, and is often unavailable in low- and middle-income countries. Teeth affected by caries are often extracted when they cause pain or discomfort.Severe dental caries can impair quality of life, including difficulties in eating and sleeping, and in its advanced stages , it may result in pain and chronic systemic infection or adverse growth patterns. Tooth decay is a frequent cause of absence from school or work.Risk factors Everyone is at risk of dental caries, but children and adolescents are most at risk. Almost half of the world’s population is affected by dental caries, making it the most prevalent of all health conditions. High levels of dental caries occur in middle-income countries, where sugars consumption is high. The majority of dental caries occurs in adults because the disease is cumulative. There is a clear dose-response relationship between sugars consumption and dental caries. The disease is also associated with socioeconomic status, with high prevalence rates among the poor and disadvantaged population groups.Dental caries develops over time; loss of tooth substance is caused by acid production resulting from bacterial metabolism of sugars. Early stages are often without symptoms, but advanced stages of dental caries may lead to pain, infections and abscesses, or even sepsis.It has been estimated that, globally in 2010, US$ 298 billion was spent on direct costs associated with dental caries. In addition, indirect costs came to US$ 144 billion, with the total financial cost reaching US$ 442 billion in 2010.Prevention and controlPopulation-wide strategies to reduce free sugars consumption are the key public health approach that should be a high and urgent priority. Because dental caries is the result of lifelong exposure to a dietary risk factor , even a small reduction in the risk of dental caries in childhood is of significance in later life; therefore, to minimize the lifelong risk of dental caries, free sugars intake should be as low as possible.It is important that population-wide prevention interventions are universally available and accessible. Such interventions include the use of fluoride and comprehensive patient-centred essential oral health care.Challenges Dental caries disproportionally affect poor and disadvantaged populations, which have lower access to prevention and care. Often, dental caries does not receive adequate priority in health planning due to an underestimation of the true burden and impact of the disease. The focus of interventions is generally characterized by an isolated disease approach and a focus on costly clinical treatment, rather than on integrated cost-effective public health strategies that address entire populations and focus on common risk factors for NCDs. Economic growth is associated with increased access to sugar-sweetened beverages and other dietary sources of free sugars. Increased availability of sugars in the absence of adequate oral health preventive measures is associated with a marked increase in the burden of oral disease.WHO responseWHO works with Member States and partners on policies and programs to reduce dental caries as part of work to prevent noncommunicable diseases. Key policies include:taxation of sugar-sweetened beverages and foods with high free sugar content;implementing clear nutrition labelling, including the information on sugars contained in a product;regulating all forms of marketing and advertising of food and beverages high in free sugars to children;improving the food environment in public institutions, particularly schools, through regulating sales of foods and beverages high in free sugars; andprioritizing awareness and access to clean water as a drink that is ‘safe for teeth’.Implementation of public health strategies to promote the use of fluoride should also be encouraged, although it does not completely prevent dental caries if implemented as a sole action. Addressing the cause is therefore essential in preventing and reducing dental caries. The severity of dental caries may be measured by using indices such as the DMFT/dmft index , which records the number of decayed (D), missing (M) and filled (F) teeth. Free sugars include all monosaccharides and disaccharides added to foods and drinks by the manufacturer, cook or consumer, and sugars naturally present in honey, syrups, fruit juices and fruit juice concentrates (WHO Guideline on sugars intake for adults and children: https://www.who.int/publications-detail/9789241549028/).
Dental caries is a major public health problem globally and is the most widespread noncommunicable disease . It is also the most prevalent condition included in the 2015 Global Burden of Disease Study, ranking first for decay of permanent teeth and 12th for deciduous teeth . Dental caries can be prevented by avoiding dietary free sugars. Moreover, dental caries is largely preventable through simple and cost-effective population-wide and individual interventions, whereas treatment is costly, and is often unavailable in low- and middle-income countries. Teeth affected by caries are often extracted when they cause pain or discomfort.
Severe dental caries can impair quality of life, including difficulties in eating and sleeping, and in its advanced stages , it may result in pain and chronic systemic infection or adverse growth patterns. Tooth decay is a frequent cause of absence from school or work.
Risk factors Everyone is at risk of dental caries, but children and adolescents are most at risk. Almost half of the world’s population is affected by dental caries, making it the most prevalent of all health conditions. High levels of dental caries occur in middle-income countries, where sugars consumption is high. The majority of dental caries occurs in adults because the disease is cumulative. There is a clear dose-response relationship between sugars consumption and dental caries. The disease is also associated with socioeconomic status, with high prevalence rates among the poor and disadvantaged population groups.
Dental caries develops over time; loss of tooth substance is caused by acid production resulting from bacterial metabolism of sugars. Early stages are often without symptoms, but advanced stages of dental caries may lead to pain, infections and abscesses, or even sepsis.
It has been estimated that, globally in 2010, US$ 298 billion was spent on direct costs associated with dental caries. In addition, indirect costs came to US$ 144 billion, with the total financial cost reaching US$ 442 billion in 2010.
Population-wide strategies to reduce free sugars consumption are the key public health approach that should be a high and urgent priority. Because dental caries is the result of lifelong exposure to a dietary risk factor , even a small reduction in the risk of dental caries in childhood is of significance in later life; therefore, to minimize the lifelong risk of dental caries, free sugars intake should be as low as possible.
It is important that population-wide prevention interventions are universally available and accessible. Such interventions include the use of fluoride and comprehensive patient-centred essential oral health care.
Dental caries disproportionally affect poor and disadvantaged populations, which have lower access to prevention and care. Often, dental caries does not receive adequate priority in health planning due to an underestimation of the true burden and impact of the disease. The focus of interventions is generally characterized by an isolated disease approach and a focus on costly clinical treatment, rather than on integrated cost-effective public health strategies that address entire populations and focus on common risk factors for NCDs. Economic growth is associated with increased access to sugar-sweetened beverages and other dietary sources of free sugars. Increased availability of sugars in the absence of adequate oral health preventive measures is associated with a marked increase in the burden of oral disease.
WHO works with Member States and partners on policies and programs to reduce dental caries as part of work to prevent noncommunicable diseases. Key policies include:
Implementation of public health strategies to promote the use of fluoride should also be encouraged, although it does not completely prevent dental caries if implemented as a sole action. Addressing the cause is therefore essential in preventing and reducing dental caries. The severity of dental caries may be measured by using indices such as the DMFT/dmft index , which records the number of decayed (D), missing (M) and filled (F) teeth. Free sugars include all monosaccharides and disaccharides added to foods and drinks by the manufacturer, cook or consumer, and sugars naturally present in honey, syrups, fruit juices and fruit juice concentrates (WHO Guideline on sugars intake for adults and children: https://www.who.int/publications-detail/9789241549028/).
News
Fact sheets
More
Health topicsAdolescent healthChild growthDiabetesHealthy dietNutrition
Adolescent health
Child growth
Diabetes
Healthy diet
Nutrition

========================================
suicide
========================================
Every year 727 000 people take their own life and there are many more people who make suicide attempts. Every suicide is a tragedy that affects families, communities and entire countries and has long-lasting effects on the people left behind. Suicide occurs throughout the lifespan and was the third leading cause of death among 15–29-year-olds globally in 2021.
Suicide does not just occur in high-income countries but is a global phenomenon in all regions of the world. In fact, close to three quarters of global suicides occurred in low- and middle-income countries in 2021.
Suicide is a serious public health problem that requires a public health response. With timely, evidence-based and often low-cost interventions, suicides can be prevented. For national responses to be effective, a comprehensive multisectoral suicide prevention strategy is needed.
The link between suicide and mental disorders and a previous suicide attempt is well established in high-income countries. However, many suicides happen impulsively in moments of crisis with a breakdown in the ability to deal with life stresses, such as financial problems, relationship disputes, or chronic pain and illness.
In addition, experiencing conflict, disaster, violence, abuse or loss and a sense of isolation are strongly associated with suicidal behaviour. Suicide rates are also high among vulnerable groups who experience discrimination, such as refugees and migrants; indigenous peoples; lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, intersex persons; and prisoners.
There are several measures that can be taken at population, sub-population and individual levels to prevent suicide and self-harm. LIVE LIFE, WHO’s initiative for suicide prevention, recommends the following key effective evidence-based interventions:
These need to go hand-in-hand with the following foundational pillars: situation analysis, multisectoral collaboration, awareness raising, capacity building, financing, surveillance and monitoring and evaluation.
Suicide prevention efforts require coordination and collaboration among multiple sectors of society, including the health sector and other sectors such as education, labour, agriculture, business, justice, law, defence, politics and the media. These efforts must be comprehensive and integrated given the multifaceted nature of suicide.
Stigma, particularly surrounding mental disorders and suicide, means many people thinking of taking their own life or who have attempted suicide are not seeking help and are therefore not getting the help they need. The prevention of suicide has not been adequately addressed due to a lack of awareness of suicide as a major public health problem and the taboo in many societies to openly discuss it. To date, only a few countries have included suicide prevention among their health priorities and only 38 countries report having a national suicide prevention strategy.
Raising community awareness and breaking down the taboo is important for countries to make progress in preventing suicide.
Globally, the availability and quality of data on suicide and self-harm is poor. Only some 80 WHO Member States have good-quality vital registration data that can be used directly to estimate suicide rates. This problem of poor-quality mortality data is not unique to suicide, but given the stigma surrounding suicide – and the illegality of suicidal behaviour in some countries – it is likely that under-reporting and misclassification are greater problems for suicide than for most other causes of death.
Improved surveillance and monitoring of suicide and self-harm are required for effective suicide prevention strategies. Cross-national differences in the patterns of suicide, and changes in the rates, characteristics and methods of suicide, highlight the need for each country to improve the comprehensiveness, quality and timeliness of their suicide-related data. This includes vital registration of suicide, hospital-based registries of self-harm and nationally representative surveys collecting information about self-reported self-harm.
The urgency to act to prevent suicides has been recognized and prioritized at the highest levels. The reduction of the suicide rate is an indicator in the UN Sustainable Development Goals , WHO’s General Programme of Work and WHO’s Comprehensive Mental Health Action Plan 2013–2030. The first WHO world suicide report, Preventing suicide: a global imperative, published in 2014, aimed to increase the awareness of the public health significance of suicide and suicide attempts and to make suicide prevention a high priority on the global public health agenda. It also aimed to encourage and support countries to develop or strengthen comprehensive national suicide prevention strategies through a multisectoral public health approach.
In 2021, WHO launched LIVE LIFE: an implementation guide for suicide prevention in countries. Accompanying resources to support the implementation of the four key LIVE LIFE interventions have also been published including the 2024 brochure on Preventing suicide by phasing out highly hazardous pesticides to support limiting access to means, Preventing suicide: a resource for media professionals, update 2023 to encourage responsible reporting of suicide, and the Helping Adolescents Thrive toolkit to foster socio-emotional life-skills among young people. At the health sector level, suicide/self-harm is one of the priority conditions in the WHO Mental Health Gap Action Programme , which provides evidence-based technical guidance to scale up service provision and care in countries for mental, neurological and substance use disorders. The mhGAP Intervention Guide ‎ includes a specific module for suicide and self-harm to support early identification, assessment, management and follow-up. Through the LIVE LIFE initiative, governments are encouraged and supported to implement a suite of evidence-based interventions and foundational pillars for suicide prevention.
Related
Fact sheets
Feature stories

========================================
syphilis
========================================
Syphilis is a preventable and curable bacterial sexually transmitted infection . If untreated, it can cause serious health issues.
Many people with syphilis do not have symptoms or do not notice them. Syphilis is transmitted during oral, vaginal and anal sex, in pregnancy and through blood transfusion. Syphilis in pregnancy may lead to stillbirth, newborn death and babies born with syphilis .
Correct and consistent use of condoms during sex can prevent syphilis. Rapid tests can provide results in a few minutes, which allows treatment initiation on the same clinic visit.
Many people with syphilis do not notice any symptoms. They can also go unnoticed by healthcare providers. Untreated, syphilis lasts many years. Syphilis has several stages.
Primary syphilis :
Syphilis can be transmitted through chancres if they are not properly covered by a condom during sexual contact. Secondary syphilis:
Latent syphilis:
Babies born with syphilis can experience:
Some of these symptoms may only be noticed later in life.
Syphilis is a preventable disease.
Using condoms consistently and correctly is the best way to prevent syphilis and many other STIs. Syphilis can also spread through contact with other areas of the body not covered by a condom, including genitals, anus and mouth.
People at higher risk of infection should be tested at least once a year. Pregnant women should be tested for syphilis at the first prenatal care visit and treated right away if the test result is positive. Congenital syphilis can only be prevented by diagnosing and treating the mother with penicillin. People diagnosed with syphilis should notify their sexual partners to prevent new infections.
Syphilis diagnosis is based on the person’s clinical and sexual history, physical examination, laboratory testing and sometimes radiology, as symptoms are not common or noticeable. Syphilis is caused by the bacterium Treponema pallidum. Laboratory tests for syphilis include direct detection of T. pallidum through a microscope or indirect methods such as blood tests. Rapid tests are also available and can provide results in minutes, facilitating immediate treatment initiation.
Identifying asymptomatic infection through laboratory or rapid tests and providing adequate treatment of positive cases will prevent further transmission and complications, as well as adverse pregnancy outcomes, including congenital syphilis. There are currently no diagnostic tests for congenital syphilis. All live or stillborn infants of women with syphilis should be examined for evidence of congenital syphilis. For live-born infants, clinical examination, radiology and laboratory tests at birth and follow up tests will help to define treatment. Syphilis is treatable and curable. People who suspect they may have syphilis should speak to their health-care provider.
The early stage of syphilis is treated with a benzathine penicillin injection. BPG is the first line treatment for syphilis and the only WHO-recommended treatment for pregnant women with syphilis. As second line treatment, doctors may also use doxycycline, ceftriaxone or azithromycin, which are antibiotic medicines. BPG is also used to treat later stages of syphilis, but more doses are required. Doses are usually given once per week for three weeks, including when it is not possible to identify the stage of infection.
BPG is the only medicine that can prevent syphilis from being passed from a mother to baby. Babies born with syphilis , or babies whose mother had untreated syphilis, need to be treated right away to avoid serious health problems.
Syphilis is transmitted during oral, anal or vaginal sex through contact with infectious lesions, and also during pregnancy through the placenta. Transmission typically occurs during early stages of the disease, i.e., up to 2 years after infection. Syphilis increases the risk of acquiring HIV infection by approximately two-fold, as well as of other STIs, such as gonorrhoea, chlamydia, genital herpes, among others. Without treatment, the tertiary phase of syphilis may lead to several complications decades after infection. At this stage, syphilis can affect multiple organs and systems, including brain, nerves, eyes, liver, heart, blood vessels, bones and joints. Tertiary syphilis can also cause death. Neurosyphilis, ocular syphilis and otosyphilis can occur at any stage of the disease. Neurosyphilis can cause strong headache, serious muscular problems and mental health issues, including dementia. Ocular syphilis can cause pain in the eye, blurry vision, sensitivity to light or blindness. Otosyphilis affects the person’s hearing and/or balance. Untreated syphilis in pregnancy may lead to severe negative consequences, such as stillbirth, neonatal death, prematurity, low birth weight and life-long health problems to the infected infant. Mother-to-child transmission of syphilis
WHO has a global initiative for the elimination of congenital syphilis in association with the elimination of mother-to-child transmission of HIV and viral hepatitis B. WHO has also developed treatment guidelines for syphilis and another guideline for testing of syphilis in pregnancy. These include the recommendation for the use of the dual HIV/syphilis test which is affordable, effective and cost-effective in some settings and context.
Additionally, WHO supports country adoption of ethical, voluntary and evidence-based strategies to notify sexual partners of people diagnosed with syphilis, HIV and other STIs. WHO also facilitates country access to quality diagnostic tests and is working toward preventing global shortages of penicillin. Related
News
Fact sheets

========================================
taeniasis-cysticercosis
========================================
Transmission and burden
Taeniasis is an intestinal infection caused by 3 species of tapeworm: Taenia solium , Taenia saginata and Taenia asiatica.
Humans can become infected with T. saginata or T. asiatica when they consume infected beef meat or pig liver tissue, respectively, which has not been adequately cooked, but taeniasis due to T. saginata or T. asiatica has no major impact on human health. Therefore, this fact sheet refers to the transmission and health impacts of T. solium only.
Infection with the T. solium tapeworm occurs when a person eats raw or undercooked, infected pork. Infection with the tapeworm causes few clinical symptoms. Tapeworm eggs passed in the faeces with the tapeworm carrier are infective for pigs. T. solium eggs may also infect humans if they are ingested by a person , causing infection with the larval parasite in the tissues .
Human cysticercosis can result in devastating effects on human health. The larvae may develop in the muscles, skin, eyes and the central nervous system. When cysts develop in the brain, the condition is referred to as neurocysticercosis . Symptoms include severe headache, blindness, convulsions and epileptic seizures and can be fatal.
Neurocysticercosis is the most frequent preventable cause of epilepsy worldwide and is estimated to cause 30% of all epilepsy cases in countries where the parasite is endemic. In specific communities the association between NCC and epilepsy can be up to 70%. In poor remote settings where the disease is present, epilepsy is difficult to diagnose and treat, and causes major stigma, especially in girls and women . Cysticercosis mainly affects the health and livelihoods of subsistence farming communities in developing countries of Africa, Asia and Latin America. It also reduces the market value of pigs and makes pork unsafe to eat. In 2015, the WHO Foodborne Disease Burden Epidemiology Reference Group identified T. solium as a leading cause of deaths from food-borne diseases, resulting in a considerable total of 2.8 million disability-adjusted life-years . The total number of people suffering from NCC, including symptomatic and asymptomatic cases, is estimated to be between 2.56–8.30 million, based on the range of epilepsy prevalence data available. Although 70% of patients with epilepsy could lead a normal life if treated correctly, poverty, ignorance of the disease, inadequate infrastructure in health or lack of access to medication, cause 75% people with this condition to be treated poorly, if treated at all.
Taeniasis due to T. solium, T. saginata or T. asiatica is usually characterized by mild and non-specific symptoms. Abdominal pain, nausea, diarrhoea or constipation may arise when the tapeworms become fully developed in the intestine, approximately 8 weeks after ingestion of meat containing cysticerci. These symptoms may continue until the tapeworm dies following treatment, otherwise it may live for several years. It is considered that untreated infections with T. solium tapeworms generally persist for 2–3 years.
In the case of cysticercosis due to T. solium, the incubation period prior to the appearance of clinical symptoms is variable, and infected people may remain asymptomatic for many years.
In some endemic regions , infected people may develop visible or palpable subcutaneous nodules. Neurocysticercosis is associated with a variety of signs and symptoms depending on the number, size, stage, and location of the pathological changes as well as the host’s immune response but can also be clinically asymptomatic. Symptoms may include chronic headaches, blindness, seizures , hydrocephalus, meningitis, and symptoms caused by lesions occupying spaces of the central nervous system.
to assist in controlling or stopping the parasite transmission cycle. The treatment can be done on an individual bases, or as preventive chemotherapy depending on the local circumstances and the control approaches being implemented. Taeniasis can be treated with single doses of praziquantel or niclosamide . Albendazole at 400 mg for 3 consecutive days has also been used . Recommendations and important considerations for the use of these drugs for preventive chemotherapy for taeniasis, are described in the PAHO/WHO Guideline for preventive chemotherapy for the control of T. solium taeniasis. In NCC, since the destruction of cysts may lead to an inflammatory response, specialised treatment is required and may include long courses with high doses of praziquantel and/or albendazole, as well as supporting therapy with corticosteroids and/or anti-epileptic drugs, and possibly surgery. The dosage and the duration of treatment can vary greatly and depend mainly on the number, size, location and developmental stage of the cysts, their surrounding inflammatory edema, acuteness and severity of clinical symptoms or signs. The WHO guidelines on management of T. solium neurocysticercosis provide more details to assist health care-providers.
There are several interventions for the control of T. solium that can be used in different combinations. In a meeting of experts in 2009, they were identified as:
Core “rapid impact” interventions:
Supporting measures:
Measures requiring more fundamental societal changes:
Mathematical models have been used to determine the probability of success of the different strategies’ combinations and the implementation period required to achieved sustained control, but they are still based in many assumptions and unknowns. However, they usually coincide in that integrated One-Health interventions, are the ones more likely to achieve a faster sustainable control.
Epilepsy is one of the most common clinical signs in patients with NCC. WHO recognizes that people with epilepsy frequently suffer stigmatization and discrimination. WHO urges the Member States to support the establishment and implementation of strategies for the management of epilepsy, and promote actions to prevent the causes of epilepsy . WHO has published the WHO guidelines on management of Taenia solium NCC to promote better clinical management.
Providing guidance for improved diagnostics and supporting countries diagnostic capacity
Faecal screening tests such as Kato-Katz, can be used to identify Taenia eggs and hence areas in which the parasite may be endemic, but the test is not species specific, so the positive samples must be confirmed as T. solium. The gold standard for the diagnostic of NCC is imaging. Improved, simple, cost-effective diagnostic tools for Taenia solium are still needed.
WHO has developed Target Product Profiles for the diagnosis of NCC, taeniasis and porcine cysticercosis and they were published in 2017. WHO has been asked by countries affected with cysticercosis, to support their efforts to control the disease. Here are some of the actions taken: Identification of endemic areas : One of the first steps to control the disease is to identify those communities or endemic areas where control measures need to be implemented. WHO has developed a mapping protocol which includes an Excel mapping tool, to evaluate the level of risk and assist the countries in identify high risk areas for endemicity to T. solium .
Donation of taenicides: Under the umbrella of universal health coverage, and with the aim of providing access to quality medicines, WHO has negotiated with Bayer the donation of taenicides and they are now available for the control of T. solium through the WHO. Supporting the validation of control programs Several countries are mounting pilot programmes while conducting operational research to measure impact and refine strategies such as the pilot project in Madagascar
Guidance to implement control programs: In the Americas, PAHO has released a manual on the “Practical considerations for the control of taeniasis and cysticercosis caused by Taenia solium – contribution to the control of T. solium in Latin America and the Caribbean
The transmission cycle of T. solium involves pigs as intermediate hosts. As part of an integrated control strategy to break the transmission cycle of the parasite it is important to implement control measures in pigs.
Advocating a multi-sectorial approach with key partners: WHO is working closely with partner agencies such as the World Organization for Animal Health and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to promote animal interventions and meet the needs for interdisciplinary collaboration to control T. solium, with the final goal to prevent human suffering due to NCC. Promoting pig interventions: Specific control measures in the pig population include the implementation of good farming practices, vaccination of pigs with the TSOL18 vaccine and the treatment with oxfendazole. Vaccination prevents the pigs getting infected; oxfendazole cures the pigs already infected at the time of vaccination, and both can be given simultaneously. Working with veterinary authorities as well as key partners in the animal sector, WHO is supporting pilot projects incorporating pig interventions, essential to attain long-term outcomes.
Robust surveillance data is fundamental to assess disease burden, take action and to evaluate progress. As for other neglected diseases, data is especially scarce. WHO is active in counters this situation by collecting and mapping data on T. solium distribution and risk factors associated with the occurrence of the parasite, such as information on pig keeping, food safety and sanitation. This information has been incorporated into the WHO Global Health Observatory. Related
Fact sheets

========================================
tetanus
========================================
Tetanus is an acute infectious disease caused by spores of the bacterium Clostridium tetani. The spores are found everywhere in the environment, particularly in soil, ash, intestinal tracts/feces of animals and humans, and on the surfaces of skin and rusty tools like nails, needles, barbed wire, etc. Being very resistant to heat and most antiseptics, the spores can survive for years.
Anyone can get tetanus, but the disease is particularly common and serious in newborn babies and pregnant women who have not been sufficiently immunized with tetanus-toxoid-containing vaccines. Tetanus during pregnancy or within 6 weeks of the end of pregnancy is called maternal tetanus, and tetanus within the first 28 days of life is called neonatal tetanus. The disease remains an important public health problem in many parts of the world, but especially in low-income countries or districts, where immunization coverage is low, and unclean birth practices are common. Neonatal tetanus occurs when nonsterile instruments are used to cut the umbilical cord or when contaminated material is used to cover the umbilical stump. Deliveries carried out by people with unclean hands or on a contaminated surface are also risk factors. In 2018, approximately 25 000 newborns died from neonatal tetanus, a 97% reduction from 1988 when an estimated 787 000 newborn babies died of tetanus within their first month of life. However, there is increased risk of tetanus in adolescent and adult males who undergo circumcision due to waning immunity and limited opportunity for receiving booster doses in males in many countries.
The incubation period of tetanus varies between 3 and 21 days after infection. Most cases occur within 14 days. Symptoms can include: In neonatal tetanus, symptoms include muscle spasms, which are often preceded by the newborn’s inability to suck or breastfeed, and excessive crying. Tetanus is diagnosed on the basis of clinical features and does not require laboratory confirmation. The WHO definition of a confirmed neonatal tetanus case is an illness occurring in an infant who has the normal ability to suck and cry in the first 2 days of life, but who loses this ability between days 3 and 28 of life and becomes rigid or has spasms.
The WHO definition of non-neonatal tetanus requires at least one of the following signs: a sustained spasm of the facial muscles in which the person appears to be grinning, or painful muscular contractions. Although this definition requires a history of injury or wound, tetanus may also occur in patients who are unable to recall a specific wound or injury.
Tetanus is a medical emergency requiring:
People who recover from tetanus do not have natural immunity and can be infected again, and therefore need to be immunized. Tetanus can be prevented through immunization with tetanus-toxoid-containing vaccines , which are included in routine immunization programmes globally and administered during antenatal care contacts. To be protected throughout life, WHO recommends that an individual receives 6 doses of TTCV. The 3-dose primary series should begin as early as 6 weeks of age, with subsequent doses given with a minimum interval of 4 weeks between doses. The 3 booster doses should preferably be given during the second year of life , at 4–7 years of age, and at 9–15 years of age. Ideally, there should be at least 4 years between booster doses.
There are many kinds of vaccines used to protect against tetanus, all of which are combined with vaccines for other diseases:
Neonatal tetanus can be prevented by immunizing women of reproductive age with TTCV, either during pregnancy or outside of pregnancy. Additionally, robust medical practices can also prevent tetanus disease including clean delivery and cord care during childbirth, and proper wound care for surgical and dental procedures. In countries where national programmes have maintained high immunization coverage for several decades, tetanus incidence rates are very low.
The global neonatal tetanus elimination goal was launched at the World Health Assembly in 1989 to reduce neonatal tetanus as a public health problem in all countries.
The Maternal and Neonatal Tetanus Elimination Initiative was launched by UNICEF, WHO and the United Nations Population Fund in 1999, revitalizing the goal of MNTE as a public health problem. As of July 2023, there are 11 countries that have not achieved MNTE.
Once MNTE has been achieved, maintaining elimination will require continued strengthening of routine immunization activities for both pregnant women and children, maintaining and increasing access to clean deliveries, reliable neonatal tetanus surveillance, and introduction and/or strengthening of school-based immunization, where feasible.
To sustain MNTE and protect all persons from tetanus, WHO recommends that 6 doses of tetanus-containing vaccine be given to all persons from childhood to adolescence.
News
Fact sheets
Feature stories
Commentaries

========================================
the-top-10-causes-of-death
========================================
In 2021, the top 10 causes of death accounted for 39 million deaths, or 57% of the total 68 million deaths worldwide.
The top global causes of death, in order of total number of lives lost, are associated with two broad topics: cardiovascular and respiratory , with COVID-19 emerging as the second leading causes of death globally.
Causes of death can be grouped into three categories: communicable , noncommunicable and injuries. At a global level, 7 of the 10 leading causes of deaths in 2021 were noncommunicable diseases, accounting for 38% of all deaths, or 68% of the top 10 causes.
The world’s biggest killer is ischaemic heart disease, responsible for 13% of the world’s total deaths. Since 2000, the largest increase in deaths has been for this disease, rising by 2.7 million to 9.1 million deaths in 2021. As a newly emerged cause of deaths, COVID-19 was directly responsible for 8.8 million deaths in 2021, and consequently, largely pushed down other leading causes of death by one place. Instead of being the second and third leading causes of death as in 2019, stroke and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease became the third and fourth in 2021, responsible for approximately 10% and 5% of total deaths, respectively.
Lower respiratory infections remained the world’s most deadly communicable disease other than COVID-19, ranked as the fifth leading cause of death. However, the number of deaths has gone down substantially: in 2021 it claimed 2.5 million lives, 370 000 fewer than in 2000.
Deaths from other noncommunicable diseases were also on the rise. Trachea, bronchus and lung cancers deaths have risen from 1.2 million in 2000 to 1.9 million in 2021 and are now ranked sixth among leading causes of death.
In 2021, Alzheimer’s disease and other forms of dementia ranked as the seventh leading cause of death, killing 1.8 million lives. Women are disproportionately affected. Globally, 68% of deaths from Alzheimer’s and other forms of dementia are women.
Diabetes was also among the top 10 causes of death, following a significant percentage increase of 95% since 2000. Other diseases which were among the top 10 causes of death in 2000 are no longer on the list. HIV and AIDS are among them. Deaths from HIV and AIDS have fallen by 61%, moving from the world’s seventh leading cause of death in 2000 to the twenty-first in 2021. Similarly, deaths due to diarrhoeal diseases have dropped by 45%, from sixth leading cause of death in 2000 to thirteenth in 2021.
In contrast, kidney diseases have risen from the world’s nineteenth leading cause of death to the ninth, with number of deaths increasing by 95% between 2000 and 2021.
The World Bank classifies the world's economies into four income groups (1) based on gross national income: low, lower-middle, upper-middle and high.
People living in a low-income country are far more likely to die of a communicable disease than a noncommunicable disease. Despite the global decline, 8 of the top 10 causes of death in 2021 in low-income countries were communicable diseases.
Malaria, tuberculosis and HIV and AIDS all remain in the top 10. However, they all fell significantly. The biggest decrease among the top 10 deaths in this group has been for HIV and AIDS, with 63% fewer deaths in 2021 than in 2000.
Diarrhoeal diseases are also a significant cause of death in low-income countries: they ranked seventh leading causes of death for this income category in 2021. Nonetheless, diarrhoeal diseases are decreasing, representing the third biggest decrease in fatalities among the top 10 .
Deaths due to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease are particularly infrequent in low-income countries compared to other income groups. It does not appear in the top 10 for low-income countries yet ranks in the top 10 for all other income groups. While the top killer in low-income countries was lower respiratory infections in 2021, COVID-19 ranked only the sixth, the lowest ranking of the diseases among all income groupings, killing a total of 258 000 people.
Lower-middle-income countries have the most balanced top 10 causes of death: 5 noncommunicable, and 5 communicable, with the new cause COVID-19 topping the list and costing over 4 million lives in 2021. Diabetes is a rising cause of death in this income group: it has moved from the fourteenth to eighth leading cause of death and the number of deaths from this disease has more than doubled since 2000.
As a top 10 cause of death in this income group, tuberculosis and diarrhoeal diseases remain a significant challenge. However, these categories of disease saw substantial decreases in absolute deaths, both falling by about 47% between 2000 and 2021. The biggest increase in absolute deaths is from ischaemic heart disease, rising by more than 1.4 million since 2000 to 3.2 million in 2021. HIV and AIDS have seen the biggest decrease in rank among the previous top 10 causes of death in 2000, moving from seventh to nineteenth.
In upper-middle-income countries, there has been a notable rise in deaths from lung cancer, which have increased by 442 000; more than 2.5 times the increase in deaths of all three other income groups combined. In addition, stomach cancer features highly in upper-middle-income countries compared to the other income groups, remaining the only group with this disease in the top 10 causes of death.
Deaths from ischaemic heart disease have increased by more than 1.4 million, the second largest rise in any income group in terms of absolute number of deaths from this cause, just 40 000 lower than the increase in lower-middle-income countries. In 2021, ischaemic heart disease ranked second, closely tracking stroke in total absolute number of deaths and one place ahead of COVID-19.
Other than COVID-19, there is only one communicable disease in the top 10 causes of death for upper-middle-income countries. It ranked eighth in 2021, down by 3 places since 2000.
In high-income countries, deaths are increasing for the majority of the top 10 diseases in 2000, primarily due to population ageing. Exceptionally, schaemic heart disease, stroke and stomach cancer are among the causes of death in the top 10 for which the total numbers have gone down between 2000 and 2021 – by 15%, 18% and 19%, respectively. High-income is the only category of income group in which there have been decreasing numbers of deaths from these three diseases. Nonetheless ischaemic heart disease and stroke have remained in the top three causes of death for this income category, with a combined total of over 2.6 million fatalities in 2021. In addition, deaths from hypertensive heart disease are rising. Reflecting a global trend, this disease has more than doubled and risen from the sixteenth leading cause of death in 2000 to the tenth in 2021. Deaths due to Alzheimer’s disease and other dementias have also increased dramatically, nearly four-fold since 2000. This became the fourth leading cause of death in high-income countries and is on track to overtake stroke as one of the top three. COVID-19 claimed 1.2 million lives and ranked second in 2021 in high-income countries. As with upper-middle-income countries, only one other communicable disease – lower respiratory infections – appears in the top 10 causes of death. It is important to know why people die to improve how people live. Measuring how many people die each year helps to assess the effectiveness of our health systems and direct resources to where they are needed most. For example, mortality data can help focus activities and resource allocation in the health sector, as well as in other sectors such as transportation, food and agriculture, and the environment.
COVID-19 has highlighted the importance for countries investing in civil registration and vital statistics systems to allow daily counting of deaths and direct prevention and treatment efforts. It has also revealed inherent fragmentation in data collection systems in most low-income countries, where policy-makers still do not know with confidence how many people die and of what causes. The World Health Organization develops standards and best practices for data collection, processing and synthesis through the consolidated and improved International Classification of Diseases . This digital platform facilitates reporting of timely and accurate data for causes of death for countries to routinely generate and use health information that conforms to international standards.
The routine collection and analysis of high-quality data on deaths and causes of death, as well as data on disability– disaggregated by age, sex and geographic location – is essential for improving health and reducing deaths and disability across the world.
Editor’s note WHO’s Global Health Estimates, from which the information in this fact sheet is extracted, present comprehensive and comparable health-related data, including life expectancy, healthy life expectancy, mortality and morbidity, and burden of diseases at global, regional and country levels disaggregated by age, sex and cause. The estimates released in 2024 report on trends for more than 160 diseases and injuries annually from 2000 to 2021. References
1. The World Bank. World Bank Country and Lending Groups. https://datahelpdesk.worldbank.org/knowledgebase/articles/906519-world-bank-country-and-lending-groups
Related
News

========================================
tobacco
========================================
The tobacco epidemic is one of the biggest public health threats the world has ever faced, killing over 8 million people a year around the world. More than 7 million of those deaths are the result of direct tobacco use while around 1.3 million are the result of non-smokers being exposed to second-hand smoke (4).
All forms of tobacco use are harmful, and there is no safe level of exposure to tobacco. Cigarette smoking is the most common form of tobacco use worldwide. Other tobacco products include waterpipe tobacco, cigars, cigarillos, heated tobacco, roll-your-own tobacco, pipe tobacco, bidis and kreteks, and smokeless tobacco products.
Around 80% of the 1.3 billion tobacco users worldwide live in low- and middle-income countries, where the burden of tobacco-related illness and death is heaviest. Tobacco use contributes to poverty by diverting household spending from basic needs such as food and shelter to tobacco. This spending behaviour is difficult to curb because tobacco is so addictive.
The economic costs of tobacco use are substantial and include significant health care costs for treating the diseases caused by tobacco use as well as the lost human capital that results from tobacco-attributable morbidity and mortality.
Good monitoring tracks the extent and character of the tobacco epidemic and indicates how best to tailor policies. Almost half of the world's population are regularly asked about their tobacco use in nationally representative surveys among adults and adolescents.
More on monitoring tobacco use
Second-hand smoke is the smoke that fills restaurants, offices, homes, or other enclosed spaces when people smoke tobacco products. There is no safe level of exposure to second-hand tobacco smoke. Second-hand smoke causes serious cardiovascular and respiratory diseases, including coronary heart disease and lung cancer, and kills around 1.3 million people prematurely every year.
Over a quarter of the world's population living in 74 countries are protected by comprehensive national smoke-free laws.
More on second-hand smoke
Among smokers who are aware of the dangers of tobacco, most want to quit. Counselling and medication can more than double a tobacco user’s chance of successful quitting.
National comprehensive cessation services with full or partial cost-coverage are available to assist tobacco users to quit in only 32 countries, representing around a third of the world's population.
More on quitting tobacco
Hard-hitting anti-tobacco mass media campaigns and pictorial health warnings prevent children and other vulnerable groups from taking up tobacco use, and increase the number of tobacco users who quit.
Over half the world’s population live in the 103 countries that meet best practice for graphic health warnings, which includes among other criteria, large pictorial health warnings displayed in the local language.
Around 1.5 billion people live in the 36 countries that have aired at least one strong anti-tobacco mass media campaign within the last 2 years.
More on tobacco health warnings
Tobacco advertising promotion and sponsorship increases and sustains tobacco use by effectively recruiting new tobacco users and discouraging tobacco users from quitting.
One third of countries (66), representing a quarter of the world’s population, have completely banned all forms of TAPS.
More on tobacco advertising bans
Tobacco taxes are the most cost-effective way to reduce tobacco use, especially among youth and low-income groups. A tax increase that increases tobacco prices by 10% decreases tobacco consumption by about 4% in high-income countries and about 5% in low- and middle-income countries.
Even so, high tobacco taxes are rarely implemented. Only 41 countries, with 12% of the world's population, have introduced taxes on tobacco products so that at least 75% of the retail price is tax.
More on tobacco taxes
Illicit trade of tobacco products must be stopped
The illicit trade in tobacco products poses major health, economic and security concerns around the world. It is estimated that 1 in every 10 cigarettes and tobacco products consumed globally is illicit.
Experience from many countries demonstrates that illicit trade can be successfully addressed even when tobacco taxes and prices are raised, resulting in increased tax revenues and reduced tobacco use. The WHO FCTC Protocol to Eliminate the Illicit Trade of Tobacco Products is the key supply side policy to reduce tobacco use and its health and economic consequences.
More on eliminating the illicit trade of tobacco products
Newer nicotine and tobacco products
Heated tobacco products are tobacco products that produce aerosols containing nicotine and toxic chemicals upon heating of the tobacco, or activation of a device containing the tobacco. They contain the highly addictive substance nicotine, non-tobacco additives and are often flavoured.
Despite claims of “risk reduction”, there is no evidence to demonstrate that HTPs are less harmful than conventional tobacco products. Many toxicants found in tobacco smoke are at significantly lower levels in HTP aerosol but HTP aerosol contains other toxicants found sometimes at higher levels than in tobacco smoke, such as glycidol, pyridine, dimethyl trisulfide, acetoin and methylglyoxal. Further, some toxicants found in HTP aerosols are not found in conventional cigarette smoke and may have associated health effects. Additionally, these products are highly variable and some of the toxicants found in the emissions of these products are carcinogens. More on heated tobacco products
Electronic cigarettes are the most common form of electronic nicotine delivery systems and electronic non-nicotine delivery systems but there are others, such as e-cigars and e-pipes. ENDS contain varying amounts of nicotine and harmful emissions. Use of ENDS/ENNDS products is colloquially referred to as ‘vaping’. However this does not mean that they are harmless or emit water vapour.
E-cigarette emissions typically contain nicotine and other toxic substances that are harmful to users and non-users who are exposed to the aerosols second-hand. Some products claiming to be nicotine-free have been found to contain nicotine.
Evidence reveals that these products are harmful to health and are not safe. However, it is too early to provide a clear answer on the long-term impacts of using them or being exposed to them. Some recent studies suggest that ENDS use can increase the risk of heart disease and lung disorders. Nicotine exposure in pregnant women can have negative health consequences on the fetus, and nicotine, which is a highly addictive substance is damaging for brain development. More on e-cigarettes
Nicotine pouches are pre-portioned pouches that contain nicotine and are similar to traditional smokeless tobacco products such as snus in some respects including appearance, inclusion of nicotine and manner of use . They are often promoted, as “tobacco-free”, which can be used anywhere and in some jurisdictions, such as the US, they are referred to as “white pouches”.
WHO response
There is a fundamental and irreconcilable conflict between the tobacco industry’s interests and public health policy interests. The tobacco industry produces and promotes a product that has been proven scientifically to be addictive, to cause disease and death and to give rise to a variety of social ills, including increased poverty.
The scale of the human and economic tragedy that tobacco imposes is shocking, and also preventable. The tobacco industry is fighting to ensure the dangers of their products are concealed, but we are fighting back.
The WHO FCTC is a milestone in the promotion of public health. It is an evidence-based treaty that reaffirms the right of people to the highest standard of health, provides legal dimensions for international health cooperation and sets high standards for compliance. Since its entry into force in 2005, the WHO FCTC has 182 Parties covering more than 90% of the world’s population.
In 2007, WHO introduced a practical, cost-effective initiative to scale up implementation of the demand reduction provisions of the WHO FCTC, called MPOWER. The 6 MPOWER measures are:
WHO has been monitoring MPOWER measures since 2007. For more details on progress made for tobacco control at global, regional and country level, please refer to the series of WHO reports on the global tobacco epidemic. More on MPOWER
(1) Doll R, Peto R, Boreham J, Sutherland I. Mortality in relation to smoking: 50 years' observations on male British doctors. BMJ. 2004 Jun 26;328 :1519.
(2) Banks, E., Joshy, G., Weber, M.F. et al. Tobacco smoking and all-cause mortality in a large Australian cohort study: findings from a mature epidemic with current low smoking prevalence. BMC Med 13, 38 .
(3) Siddiqi, K., Husain, S., Vidyasagaran, A. et al. Global burden of disease due to smokeless tobacco consumption in adults: an updated analysis of data from 127 countries. BMC Med 18, 222 .
(4) Global Burden of Disease [database.Washington, DC: Institute of Health Metrics; 2019. IHME,accessed 17 July 2023
Related
Using AI to quit tobacco
Meet S.A.R.A.H. – A Smart AI Resource Assistant for Health
E-cigarettes: how risky are they?
Health benefits of smoking cessation
Tobacco and COVID-19
News
Feature stories
Events
More
GuidePlain packaging of tobacco products: evidence, design and implementationPublicationsWHO global report on trends in prevalence of tobacco use 2000-2025, fourth editionWHO report on the global tobacco epidemic 2021 More about tobaccoTobacco Free InitiativeWHO Framework Convention on Tobacco ControlMore about tobacco: topical overview
Guide
Publications
More about tobacco

========================================
trachoma
========================================
Trachoma is the leading infectious cause of blindness worldwide. It is caused by an obligate intracellular bacterium called Chlamydia trachomatis. The infection is transmitted by direct or indirect transfer of eye and nose discharges of infected people, particularly young children who harbour the principal reservoir of infection. These discharges can be spread by particular species of flies.
In areas where trachoma is endemic, active trachoma is common among preschool-aged children, with prevalence rates which can be as high as 60–90%. Infection becomes less frequent and shorter in duration with increasing age. Infection is usually acquired when living in close proximity to others with active disease, and the family is the main setting for transmission. An individual’s immune system can clear a single episode of infection, but in endemic communities re-acquisition of the organism occurs frequently.
After years of repeated infection, the inside of the eyelid can become so severely scarred that it turns inwards and causes the eyelashes to rub against the eyeball , resulting in constant pain and light intolerance. This and other alterations of the eye can lead to scarring of the cornea. Left untreated, this condition leads to the formation of irreversible opacities, with resulting visual impairment or blindness. The age at which this occurs depends on several factors including local transmission intensity. In very highly endemic communities it can occur in childhood, though onset of visual impairment between the ages of 30 and 40 years is more typical.
Visual impairment or blindness results in a worsening of the life experience of affected individuals and their families, who are normally already amongst the poorest of the poor. Women are blinded up to 4 times as often as men, probably due to their close contact with infected children and their resulting greater frequency of infection episodes.
Environmental factors associated with more intense transmission of C. trachomatis include:
Trachoma is hyperendemic in many of the poorest and most rural areas of Africa, Central and South America, Asia, Australia and the Middle East.
It is responsible for the blindness or visual impairment of about 1.9 million people. It causes about 1.4% of all blindness worldwide.
Overall, Africa remains the most affected continent and the one with the most intensive control efforts.
As of 21 October 2024, 21 countries – Benin, Cambodia, China, Gambia, Islamic Republic of Iran, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Ghana, India, Iraq, Malawi, Mali, Mexico, Morocco, Myanmar, Nepal, Oman, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Togo, Vanuatu and Viet Nam – had been validated by WHO as having eliminated trachoma as a public health problem.
The burden of trachoma on affected individuals and communities is enormous. The economic cost in terms of lost productivity from blindness and visual impairment is estimated at US$ 2.9–5.3 billion annually, increasing to US$ 8 billion when trichiasis is included.
Elimination programmes in endemic countries are being implemented using the WHO-recommended SAFE strategy. This consists of:
Most endemic countries have agreed to accelerate the implementation of this strategy to achieve elimination targets.
Data reported to WHO by Member States for 2023 show that 130 746 people with trachomatous trichiasis were provided with corrective surgery in that year, and 32.9 million people in endemic communities were treated with antibiotics to eliminate trachoma. In 2019, when COVID-19 did not affect programmes’ ability to undertake community-based work, 92 622 people with trachomatous trichiasis were provided with corrective surgery, and 95.2 million people were treated with antibiotics.
Elimination efforts need to continue to ensure that we reach the target set by World Health Assembly resolution WHA 51.11, which is elimination of trachoma as a public health problem (1). Particularly important will be the full engagement of multiple actors involved in water, sanitation and socioeconomic development.
WHO adopted the SAFE strategy in 1993. WHO’s mandate is to provide leadership and coordination to international efforts aiming to eliminate trachoma as a public health problem, and to report on progress towards that target.
In 1996, WHO launched the WHO Alliance for the Global Elimination of Trachoma by 2020. The Alliance is a partnership which supports implementation of the SAFE strategy by Member States, and the strengthening of national capacity through epidemiological surveys, monitoring, surveillance, project evaluation, and resource mobilization.
The World Health Assembly adopted resolution WHA51.11 in 1998, targeting the global elimination of trachoma as a public health problem with 2020 as the target date. The neglected tropical diseases road map 2021–2030, endorsed by the World Health Assembly in 2020 through its decision 73(33), sets 2030 as the new target date for global elimination. Notes
(1) Elimination of trachoma as a public health problem is defined as: (i) a prevalence of trachomatous trichiasis “unknown to the health system” of <0.2% in adults aged ≥15 years , and (ii) a prevalence of trachomatous inflammation—follicular in children aged 1–9 years of less than 5%, sustained for at least two years in the absence of ongoing antibiotic mass treatment, in each formerly endemic district; plus the existence of a system able to identify and manage incident trachomatous trichiasis cases, using defined strategies, with evidence of appropriate financial resources to implement those strategies.
Related
Fact sheets

========================================
trans-fat
========================================
Cardiovascular diseases are the leading cause of mortality in the world. Major risk factors are unhealthy diets, physical inactivity, tobacco and alcohol use. Among other dietary factors, high intake of trans fat increases the risk of death from any cause by 34%, coronary heart disease deaths by 28%, and coronary heart disease by 21%. Trans fat has no known health benefits.
Trans fat is produced industrially by the partial hydrogenation of any liquid oils, in most cases vegetable oils, but also occurs naturally in meat and dairy products from ruminant animals. For a healthy diet, the recommended intake of trans-fats is less than 1% of total energy. Industrially produced trans fats are not part of a healthy diet and should be avoided. Governments have a central role in creating healthy food environments that enable people to adopt and maintain healthy dietary practices and must encourage reformulation of food products to reduce trans fat, with the goal of eliminating industrially produced trans fat. WHO developed a REPLACE action package that supports governments to design and implement a policy to eliminate industrially produced trans fat from their food supply.
Use of trans fats increased dramatically in recent years because they tend to be cheaper than healthier fats and have several chemical and physical characteristics, such as being solid at room temperature, that make them suitable for a variety of processed food products.
Industrially produced trans fats are formed in an industrial process that adds hydrogen to vegetable oil, converting the liquid into a solid and resulting in partially hydrogenated oil . On average, trans fat concentrations in PHO are 25–45%. Naturally occurring trans fats come from ruminants , are found in meat and dairy foods, and are equally harmful as industrially produced trans fat.
Frying oil at high temperatures leads to modest increases in trans fat concentrations. However, this amount of trans fat generated is low when compared with the amount of trans fat in PHO. Replacing trans fat with healthier oils and fats in food supply is a low-cost solution for governments to save the lives of their citizens. Experiences in several countries demonstrate that industrially produced trans fat can be replaced by healthier oils. Costs of implementing best practice interventions are well under the commonly accepted thresholds of cost-effectiveness. Thus, WHO recommends trans fat elimination as a cost-effective intervention for low- and middle-income countries. Governments can eliminate the cause of 7% of cardiovascular disease globally with a low-cost investment.
Experiences in several countries demonstrate that mandatory approaches are much more effective than voluntary approaches to reducing trans fat in the food supply and in the population. WHO recommends the following two best-practice alternatives:
1) mandatory national limit of 2 grams of industrially produced trans fat per 100 grams of total fat in all foods; and 2) mandatory national ban on the production or use of partially hydrogenated oils as an ingredient in all foods. PHO in foods can be replaced by oils rich in polyunsaturated fatty acids , followed by oils rich in monounsaturated fatty-acids . Oils rich in PUFA include those from safflower, corn, sunflower, soybean, fatty fishes, walnuts and seeds; oils rich in MUFA include canola, olive, peanut, and oils from nuts and avocados. The choices of fats and oils used in many countries will be influenced by availability, cost of alternatives and the oil industry’s capacity to innovate. Although the primary responsibility to protect citizens from the harmful effects of industrially produced trans fat rests with governments, there are actions that individuals can take too to reduce trans fact intake: intake:
WHO spearheads efforts to eliminate industrially produced trans fat globally and supports country actions. Almost half of the world's population is currently covered by best-practice policies for TFA elimination, which means complete elimination of a dietary risk factor for heart disease. The REPLACE action package, a roadmap for countries developed by WHO to help accelerate actions, offers six practical steps for the promotion of use and consumption of healthier fats and oils, and the elimination of industrially produced trans fats, to be achieved through regulatory actions, while establishing solid monitoring systems and creating awareness among policy-makers, producers, suppliers and the public. It is supported by a Global protocol for measuring fatty acid profiles of foods, with emphasis on monitoring trans-fatty acids originating from partially hydrogenated oils, developed to strengthen laboratory capacities. WHO monitors countries' progress and has developed the Country Score Card to track performance, with WHO’s trans fat elimination validation programme formally recognizing countries that have eliminated industrially produced trans fat from their national food supplies.
Related
News
Fact sheets
More
Healthy alternatives to trans-fats Trans what? Trans-fatty Acids facts Self-learning Virtual Course on REPLACE Trans Fat Healthy alternatives to trans-fats Trans what? Trans-fatty Acids facts Self-learning Virtual Course on REPLACE Trans Fat

========================================
trichomoniasis
========================================
Trichomonas vaginalis is a preventable and curable sexually transmitted protozoan that infects the urogenital tract.
More than 50% of women with Trichomonas vaginalis infection have vaginal discharge and about 10% of men have urethritis or urethral discharge. Correct and consistent use of condoms during sex can prevent trichomoniasis. Trichomonas vaginalis is the most common non-viral STI. There were an estimated 156 million new cases of T. vaginalis infection among people aged 15–49 years old in 2020 globally in 2020 . Approximately one third of new infections in this age group occur in the WHO African Region, followed by the Region of the Americas. Sexually active people can get trichomoniasis by having sex without a condom with a partner who has trichomoniasis.
Trichomoniasis infection in women may be symptomatic or asymptomatic. Vaginal discharge is the main symptom that women may present, and can be accompanied by itch, pain when urinating and pain during intercourse. In men, most infections are asymptomatic but some experience penile discharge or pain when urinating.
Symptomatic women can have vaginal discharge, which may appear purulent. Other symptoms include a red and sore vagina. The person with the infection can also feel pain during intercourse and urination. In women, when T. vaginalis is present, discharge can be observed in the vagina during a speculum examination by a health provider.
Men are often asymptomatic, but some experience urethral discharge/urethritis, or penile irritation.
Trichomoniasis is a preventable condition.
The most effective method to prevent sexual transmission of trichomoniasis and various other STIs is by consistently and correctly using condoms.
People diagnosed with trichomoniasis should inform their sexual partners to prevent further transmission. If that is not possible, they should request support from the health provider to notify their sexual partners.
Healthcare providers will discuss the patient’s medical and sexual history and conduct a genital examination, including speculum examination and palpation, to enable them to have important clues to clinical diagnosis. Diagnostic options include smear microscopy and antigen or molecular testing. The latter include nucleic acid amplification tests , considered in some settings as a gold standard for diagnosing T. vaginalis. These can be performed in the lab. Vaginal or endocervical specimens are the preferred specimen type for diagnostic testing. In many primary healthcare settings where diagnostic capacity for detecting T. vaginalis is not available, a syndromic approach for case management is recommended.
In the presence of T. vaginalis , tests for other sexually transmitted infections are recommended, together with notification of sexual partner(s). Trichomoniasis is treatable and curable. It is best treated with the antibiotics metronidazole or tinidazole. Although resistance is uncommon, treatment failure occurs in a small proportion of cases. Several second-line regimens are available and should be initiated by the healthcare professionals. Women who present with vaginal discharge, and who are managed based on the syndromic approach are treated for bacterial vaginosis (BV), candidiasis and trichomoniasis. Metronidazole is indicated for both BV and trichomonas, while topical or oral antifungals are indicated for candidiasis.
Recommendations for the treatment of Trichomonas vaginalis, Mycoplasma genitalium, Candida albicans, bacterial vaginosis and human papillomavirus ‎
Untreated T. vaginalis is linked to adverse birth outcomes, including low birth weight, preterm delivery and premature rupture of membranes. Although uncommon, perinatal transmission of T. vaginalis can occur, leading to vaginal and respiratory infections in newborns.
T. vaginalis infections are linked to a 1.5 times increased risk of HIV acquisition. The WHO Global health sector strategies on HIV, viral hepatitis and STIs 2022–2030 aims for a 50% reduction in new cases of trichomoniasis by 2030. WHO collaborates with countries and partners to enhance people-centred STI case management methods, promote suitable treatment recommendations, and implement effective testing and partner services strategies. WHO also supports the development of accessible and affordable high-quality diagnostics and treatment options, as well as advancements in vaccine development. Additionally, WHO focuses on improving country and global-level monitoring of new infections. Although antimicrobial resistance in T. vaginalis is not widespread, WHO closely monitors patterns of potential antimicrobial resistance of this pathogen to inform treatment recommendations and national policies.
In 2024, WHO published Recommendations for the treatment of Trichomonas vaginalis, Mycoplasma genitalium, Candida albicans, bacterial vaginosis and human papillomavirus ‎ to provide evidence-informed clinical and practical recommendations on case management of Trichomonas vaginalis. Related
Global health sector strategies 2022-2030
Guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
News
Fact sheets
Feature stories

========================================
/trypanosomiasis-human-african-(sleeping-sickness)
========================================
Human African trypanosomiasis, also known as sleeping sickness, is a vector-borne parasitic disease. It is caused by protozoans of the genus Trypanosoma, transmitted to humans by bites of tsetse flies which have acquired the parasites from infected humans or animals.
Tsetse flies inhabit sub-Saharan Africa and only certain species transmit the disease. Rural populations which depend on agriculture, fishing, animal husbandry or hunting are the most exposed. In many regions where tsetse flies are found, HAT is not. The disease has a focal distribution ranging from single villages to entire regions, and the incidence can vary from one village to the next.
HAT takes 2 forms, depending on the parasite subspecies:
American trypanosomiasis, or Chagas disease, occurs mainly in Latin America. It is caused by a different Trypanosoma subgenus, transmitted by another vector and the disease characteristics are very different from HAT.
Other trypanosomes cause disease in wild and domestic animals. In African cattle, it is called Nagana. Trypanosomiasis in domestic animals is a major obstacle to rural economic development.
Domestic and wild animals are the main reservoir of human-pathogenic T. b. rhodesiense. Animals can also be infected with T. b. gambiense and possibly act as a reservoir to a lesser extent not precisely known. HAT threatens mainly populations of remote rural areas with limited health services, which complicates its diagnosis and treatment. These populations are also affected by war, displacement and poverty, factors favoring transmission. Several epidemics occurred over the last century:
The 1920 epidemic was controlled via mobile teams that screened millions of people. By the mid-1960s HAT was under control with below 5000 annual cases continent-wide. As surveillance relaxed, a resurgence ensued, reaching epidemic proportions in several regions by 1970. In 1998 almost 40 000 cases were reported, amidst an estimated 300 000 undetected and untreated cases. The prevalence reached 50% in several villages in Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo , and South Sudan. HAT was the first or second greatest cause of mortality in those communities. The efforts of WHO, national control programmes, bilateral cooperation and nongovernmental organizations during the 1990s and early 2000s reversed the curve, and the WHO Neglected Tropical Diseases Roadmap targeted for 2020 its elimination as a public health problem, and for 2030 the interruption of transmission .
After continued control efforts, HAT occurrence reached a historic low under 2000 cases in 2017 and under 1000 cases in 2018, remaining below that threshold as of 2022. The population at risk estimated for the period 2016–2020 was 55 million people, with only 3 million at moderate-high risk.
HAT incidence strongly differs by country and by region. Taking the last 5 years:
HAT is mostly transmitted through tsetse flies. Other possible transmission ways are:
Initially the trypanosomes multiply in subcutaneous tissue, blood and lymph. This is called haemo-lymphatic or first stage, which entails bouts of fever, headache, enlarged lymph nodes, joint pains and itching.
Later the parasites cross the blood-brain barrier into the central nervous system causing the meningo-encephalitic or second stage. Generally this is when more obvious signs and symptoms of HAT appear: behaviour changes, confusion, sensory disturbances and poor coordination. Sleep cycle disturbance, which gives the disease its name, is a prominent feature. Without treatment, HAT is usually fatal although rare cases of self-cure have been reported.
Diagnosis involves 3 steps:
Early diagnosis is important to avoid progressing to the neurological stage with more complex and risky treatment.
The long, relatively asymptomatic first stage of gambiense-HAT is one of the reasons why active screening of exposed populations is done, to detect cases at an early stage and remove them as reservoir. Exhaustive screening requires a major investment in human and material resources. In Africa such resources are often scarce, particularly in remote areas. Hence, some infected individuals may die before they can ever be diagnosed and treated.
The treatment choice depends on the disease form and the disease stage. The earlier the disease is treated, the better the prospect of cure. The assessment of treatment outcome requires follow up for up to 24 months with clinical assessment and laboratory exams including sometimes of cerebrospinal fluid, because parasites may remain viable and reproduce the disease many months after treatment.
Treatment in the second stage requires drugs that cross the blood–brain barrier.
All anti-trypanosomals are donated to WHO by the manufacturers and distributed for free to endemic countries. New WHO treatment guidelines for gambiense-HAT were issued in 2019. Six drugs are used:
In gambiense-HAT
In rhodesiense-HAT
A range of activities of the WHO HAT surveillance and control program are enabled since 2001 by public–private partnerships with the Sanofi Foundation and Bayer HealthCare.
WHO supplies all anti-trypanosome medicines worldwide gratis thanks to donations from Sanofi and Bayer, and collaboration with MSF-Logistics for conditioning and shipment.
A WHO biobank is available to researchers for the development of new and affordable diagnostic tools. Hosted in the Institut Pasteur of Paris, it contains samples from gambiense-HAT and rhodesiense-HAT patients and from uninfected controls.
The WHO Atlas of HAT, jointly implemented with FAO, compiles epidemiological data geolocated at village level. The WHO Network for HAT Elimination coordinates efforts from all stakeholders including national HAT programmes, international and non-governmental organizations, academia and donors. Network subgroups deal with the diagnostic, therapeutic, antivectorial, sociocultural, programatic and scientific aspects of HAT.
WHO collaborates with FAO, IAEA and the African Union within the Program Against African Trypanosomiasis .
WHO provides support to national programs in order to:
Related
Fact sheets

========================================
tuberculosis
========================================
Tuberculosis (TB) is an infectious disease caused by bacteria that most often affects the lungs. It spreads through the air when people with TB cough, sneeze or spit.
Tuberculosis is preventable and curable.
About a quarter of the global population is estimated to have been infected with TB bacteria. About 5–10% of people infected with TB will eventually get symptoms and develop TB disease.
Those who are infected but free of disease cannot transmit it. TB disease is usually treated with antibiotics and can be fatal without treatment.
In certain countries, the Bacille Calmette-Guérin vaccine is given to babies or small children to prevent TB. The vaccine prevents deaths from TB and protects children from serious forms of TB.
Certain conditions can increase a person’s risk for TB disease:
People with TB infection don’t feel sick and aren’t contagious. Only a small proportion of people who get infected with TB will get TB disease and symptoms. Babies and children are at higher risk.
TB disease occurs when bacteria multiply in the body and affect different organs. TB symptoms may be mild for many months, so it is easy to spread TB to others without knowing it. Some people with TB disease do not have any symptoms.
Common symptoms of TB are:
The symptoms people get depend on which part of the body is affected by TB. While TB usually affects the lungs, it can also involve the kidneys, brain, spine and skin.
Follow these steps to help prevent tuberculosis infection and spread:
WHO recommends the use of rapid molecular diagnostic tests as the initial diagnostic test in all persons with signs and symptoms of TB.
Rapid diagnostic tests recommended by WHO include the Xpert MTB/RIF Ultra and Truenat assays. These tests have high diagnostic accuracy and will lead to major improvements in the early detection of TB and drug-resistant TB.
A tuberculin skin test , interferon gamma release assay or newer antigen-based skin tests can be used to identity people with infection.
Diagnosing multidrug-resistant and other resistant forms of TB as well as HIV-associated TB can be complex and expensive.
Tuberculosis is particularly difficult to diagnose in children.
Tuberculosis disease is treated with special antibiotics. Treatment is recommended for both TB infection and disease.
The most common antibiotics used are:
To be effective, medications need to be taken daily for 4–6 months. It is dangerous to stop the medications early or without medical advice as it can prompt TB bacteria in the body to become resistant to the drugs.
TB that doesn’t respond to standard drugs is called drug-resistant TB and requires treatment with different medicines.
Drug resistance emerges when TB medicines are used inappropriately, through incorrect prescription by health care providers, poor quality drugs, or patients stopping treatment prematurely.
MDR-TB is a form of TB caused by bacteria that do not respond to isoniazid and rifampicin, the two most effective first-line TB drugs. MDR-TB is treatable and curable by using other drugs, which tend to be more expensive and toxic.
In some cases, extensively drug resistant TB or XDR-TB can develop. TB caused by bacteria that do not respond to the most effective drugs in MDR-TB treatment regimens can leave patients with very limited treatment options.
MDR-TB remains a public health crisis and a health security threat. Only about 2 in 5 people with multidrug resistant TB accessed treatment in 2023.
In accordance with WHO guidelines, detection of MDR-TB requires bacteriological confirmation of TB and testing for drug resistance using rapid molecular tests or culture methods.
In 2022, new WHO guidelines prioritized a short 6-month all-oral regimen known as BPaLM/BPaL as a treatment of choice for eligible patients. Globally in 2023, 5646 people with MDR/RR-TB were reported to have been started treatment on the BPaLM/BPaL regimen, up from 1744 in 2022. The shorter duration, lower pill burden and high efficacy of this novel regimen can help ease the burden on health systems and save precious resources to further expand the diagnostic and treatment coverage for all individuals in need. In the past, MDR-TB treatment used to last for at least 9 months and up to 20 months. WHO recommends expanded access to all-oral regimens.
People living with HIV are 16 times more likely to fall ill with TB disease than people without HIV. TB is the leading cause of death among people with HIV.
HIV and TB form a lethal combination, each speeding the other's progress. In 2023, about 161 000 people died of HIV-associated TB. The percentage of notified TB patients who had a documented HIV test result in 2023 was 80%, this was the same level as in 2022, but up from 76% in 2021. The WHO African Region has the highest burden of HIV-associated TB. Overall in 2023, only 56% of TB patients known to be living with HIV were on antiretroviral therapy .
WHO recommends a 12-component approach of collaborative TB-HIV activities, including actions for prevention and treatment of infection and disease, to reduce deaths.
TB mostly affects adults in their most productive years. However, all age groups are at risk. Over 80% of cases and deaths are in low- and middle-income countries.
TB occurs in every part of the world. In 2023, the largest number of new TB cases occurred in the WHO South-East Asia Region , followed by the African Region and the Western Pacific Region . Around 87% of new TB cases occurred in the 30 high TB burden countries, with more than two-thirds of the global total in Bangladesh, China, Democratic Republic of the Congo, India, Indonesia, Nigeria, Pakistan and the Philippines.
Globally, about 50% of people treated for TB and their households face total costs that are catastrophic , far from the WHO End TB Strategy target of zero. Those with compromised immune systems, such as people living with HIV, undernutrition or diabetes, or people who use tobacco, have a higher risk of falling ill. Globally in 2023, there were estimated 0.96 million new TB cases that were attributable to undernutrition, 0.75 million to alcohol use disorders, 0.70 million to smoking, 0.61 million to HIV infection, and 0.38 million to diabetes.
US$ 22 billion are needed annually for TB prevention, diagnosis, treatment and care to achieve global targets by 2027 agreed on at the 2023 UN high level-TB meeting. As in the past decade, most of the spending on TB services in 2023 was from domestic sources. In low- and middle-income countries, international donor funding remains crucial. From 2019 to 2023, there was a decline in available funding from domestic sources and a very slight increase in funding provided by international donors. Most of the reduction in domestic funding is largely explained by reductions in domestic funding trends in Brazil, the Russian Federation, India, China and South Africa . Financing for TB research and innovation at US$ 1.0 billion in 2022 also continues to fall far short of the global target of US$ 5 billion per year, constrained by the overall level of investment. WHO is working closely with countries, partners and civil society in scaling up the TB response. Six core functions are being pursued by WHO to contribute to achieving the targets of the 2023 UN high-level meeting political declaration, Sustainable Development Goals, End TB Strategy and WHO strategic priorities:
Related
News
Facts in pictures
More
Drug-resistant tuberculosisWHO's work on tuberculosis

========================================
tungiasis
========================================
Tungiasis is caused by the adult female sand flea, Tunga penetrans. The larvae and pupae develop in dry shaded soils, mostly inside the sleeping rooms of houses with an unsealed earthen floor where most transmission occurs. The embedded flea causes inflammation, pain and itching, difficulty walking, sleeping and concentrating on school or work. Tungiasis is a zoonosis that affects humans and animals alike.
The only product shown to have high efficacy and safety for treatment is NYDA®, a combination of dimeticone oils. Control will require a One Health approach, treating the patients as well as spraying floors with insecticide or sealing them, daily foot washing with soap, and treating any infected animals owned by affected families.
T. penetrans is found in tropical and subtropical regions of the Caribbean, South America and sub-Saharan Africa. Over 1 billion people live in areas suitable for transmission of tungiasis but no country conducts routine surveillance so the actual disease burden is not known. However, within endemic communities, surveys have reported prevalence from 7% to 63%, i.e., distribution is heterogeneous.
Elderly people and children aged 5–14 years, particularly boys, are at highest risk. People with disabilities are also highly vulnerable to infection. Tungiasis thrives where living conditions are precarious, such as villages located in remote beaches, communities in the rural hinterland and shanty towns of big cities. In these settings, the poorest of the poor carry the highest burden of the disease.
Tungiasis is diagnosed by visual inspection, the live fleas appearing as a whitish disc varying in size with a dark point in the middle that darkens with time until dead and entirely black. In areas where the disease is endemic, affected individuals, even children, typically know whether they have tungiasis. Most affected individuals attempt to extract the fleas, leaving a typical circular lesion, often with the blackened remains of the dead flea. This is a clear indication of recent infection.
The acute and chronic morbidity associated with tungiasis results from an inflammatory reaction around embedded female sand fleas, exacerbated by bacterial superinfection. During the acute phase, erythema, oedema, desquamation, pain and itching are constant. Itching induces scratching of the lesion, which in turn facilitates bacterial superinfection. Abscesses, sometimes large, are common.
The feet are the most common infection point but infestation can occur in all parts of the body. Bullous-type lesions have also been reported. Fissures, ulcers, lymphangitis, lymphoedema, ascending neuritis, deformation and loss of nails, and tissue necrosis are chronic complications. These result in pain, disability, disfigurement and mutilation of the feet, causing characteristic changes in the way people with tungiasis walk.
The main transmission site is inside the sleeping rooms of houses with an unsealed earthen floor where the larvae and pupae develop after the eggs are dropped there. The adult female sand flea burrows into the skin and grows 2000 times in size as eggs develop. The female flea typically lives for 4–6 weeks, during which the eggs are expelled and fall to the ground. The toes, sole, lateral rim of the foot and heel are common sites of infection, and 99% of all lesions occur on the feet. In some areas, several mammalian species have been found to act as reservoirs for human infection. In rural areas, these are predominantly pigs and bovines; in resource-poor urban communities, they are found in dogs, cats and rats. In some areas, infection can be transmitted without an animal reservoir when skin comes into contact with soil or a floor where adult sand fleas have developed. The embedded flea induces inflammation associated with immense pain and itching. This disturbs sleep and concentration on school or work. Patients with large numbers of embedded fleas have difficulty walking, often with loss of nails and disfigured and mutilated feet. People with tungiasis experience stigma and social exclusion and a low quality of life. Children with tungiasis have cognitive impairment and lower school exam scores. Impaired physical fitness of adult household members could have a negative impact on household economics. Bacterial superinfection may cause life-threatening complications, such as septicaemia, tetanus or gangrene. In endemic areas, mechanical extraction of burrowed sand fleas is common as an act of despair. This is usually done by the patients themselves or a caregiver. Embedded parasites are removed under non-sterile conditions using instruments such as sticks, hair pins, thorns, safety pins, sewing needles or scissors. The procedure is painful and traumatizes children. Removing the fleas can cause local inflammation if the parasite ruptures and introduces pathogenic bacteria, leading to further superinfection of the sore. The instrument is often subsequently used on several people, which risks transmission of diseases such as hepatitis B virus , hepatitis C virus or even HIV.
Mechanical extraction should only be performed with surgical instruments by an experienced nurse under sterile conditions. After removal of sand fleas, the wound must be dressed appropriately and the tetanus vaccination status verified and a booster vaccination given, if indicated. Topical treatment with a formula of two dimeticone oils with low viscosity is highly effective and safe.
The major risk factor for tungiasis is extreme poverty, which drives behaviour that puts people at risk for infection. This includes living in a house with an unsealed earthen floor not washing feet regularly and not using soap when washing. In some communities, infection is also linked to ownership of dogs or pigs.
Thus a long-lasting reduction of incidence and of tungiasis-associated morbidity can only be achieved through a One Health approach integrating behaviour change to increase soap use in daily foot washing, spraying floors with insecticide or sealing them, treating animal reservoirs where they are infected and treating humans.
The regular application of a repellent based on coconut oil effectively prevents the fleas from penetrating the skin. When the repellent is applied twice daily on the feet, tungiasis-associated morbidity rapidly decreases and approaches zero after 8–10 weeks. Even if applied intermittently, the reduction of morbidity is significant.
The key challenge is the lack of funding and attention on the disease by governments and funding agencies. As a consequence of this, no country knows its disease burden nor distribution. The highly effective dimeticone treatment is not available in endemic countries and no safe and effective alternatives have been explored sufficiently nor intervention trials to identify effective prevention interventions. In May 2013, the 66th World Health Assembly resolved to intensify and integrate measures against neglected tropical diseases such as tungiasis and to plan investments to improve the health and social well-being of affected populations. WHO works with Member States and partners to ensure the implementation of resolution WHA66.12. In 2022, WHO published the skin NTDs framework to promote integration across different skin diseases. Tungiasis is included in this document and the NTD road map to increase surveillance and visibility of the disease.
Related
News
Fact sheets
More
Report of a WHO informal meeting on the development of a conceptual framework for tungiasis control: virtual meeting, 11–13 January 2021International Alliance for the Control of ScabiesGlobal network committed to elimination of scabies as a public health problem International Foundation for DermatologyThe International Foundation for DermatologyThe International League of Dermatological Societies Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

========================================
typhoid
========================================
Typhoid fever is a life-threatening infection caused by the bacterium Salmonella Typhi. It is usually spread through contaminated food or water. Once Salmonella Typhi bacteria are ingested, they multiply and spread into the bloodstream.
Urbanization and climate change have the potential to increase the global burden of typhoid. In addition, increasing resistance to antibiotic treatment is making it easier for typhoid to spread in communities that lack access to safe drinking water or adequate sanitation.
Salmonella Typhi lives only in humans. Persons with typhoid fever carry the bacteria in their bloodstream and intestinal tract. Symptoms include prolonged high fever, fatigue, headache, nausea, abdominal pain, and constipation or diarrhoea. Some patients may have a rash. Severe cases may lead to serious complications or even death. Typhoid fever can be confirmed through blood testing.
Improved living conditions and the introduction of antibiotics resulted in a drastic reduction of typhoid fever morbidity and mortality in industrialized countries. However, the disease continues to be a public health problem in many developing areas of the WHO African, Eastern Mediterranean, South-East Asia and Western Pacific Regions.
As of 2019 estimates, there are 9 million cases of typhoid fever annually, resulting in about 110 000 deaths per year.
Typhoid risk is higher in populations that lack access to safe water and adequate sanitation, and children are at highest risk.
Typhoid fever can be treated with antibiotics. Antimicrobial resistance is common with likelihood of more complicated and expensive treatment options required in the most affected regions.
Even when the symptoms go away, people may still be carrying typhoid bacteria, meaning they can spread it to others, through shedding of bacteria in their faeces.
It is important for people being treated for typhoid fever to do the following:
Typhoid fever is common in places with poor sanitation and a lack of safe drinking water. Access to safe water and adequate sanitation, hygiene among food handlers and typhoid vaccination are all effective in preventing typhoid fever.
Typhoid conjugate vaccine, consisting of the purified Vi antigen linked to a carrier protein, is given as a single injectable dose in children from 6 months of age and in adults up to 45 years or 65 years . Two additional vaccines have been used for many years in older children and adults at risk of typhoid, including travellers. These vaccines do not provide long-lasting immunity and are not approved for children younger than 2 years old:
Two typhoid conjugate vaccines have been prequalified by WHO since December 2017 and are being introduced into childhood immunization programmes in typhoid endemic countries.
All travellers to endemic areas are at potential risk of typhoid fever, although the risk is generally low in tourist and business centres where standards of accommodation, sanitation and food hygiene are high. Typhoid fever vaccination should be offered to travellers to destinations where the risk of typhoid fever is high.
The following recommendations will help ensure safety while travelling:
In October 2017, the Strategic Advisory Group of Experts on Immunization , which advises WHO on vaccine use, issued a recommendation for the typhoid conjugate vaccine to be added to routine childhood immunization programmes in typhoid endemic countries. SAGE also called for the introduction of typhoid conjugate vaccine to be prioritized for countries with the highest burden of typhoid disease or high levels of antibiotic resistance to Salmonella Typhi.
Starting in 2019, Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance has provided funding to support typhoid conjugate vaccine use in eligible countries.
As at March 2023, WHO has prequalified two conjugate vaccines for the prevention of typhoid. Typhoid conjugate vaccine has longer-lasting immunity than the older typhoid vaccines and can be given as a single dose to children from the age of 6 months.
In addition to decreasing the disease burden in endemic countries and saving lives, widespread use of the typhoid conjugate vaccine in affected countries is expected to reduce the need for antibiotics for typhoid treatment and slow the increase in antibiotic resistance in Salmonella Typhi. Related

========================================
ultraviolet-radiation
========================================
Ultraviolet radiation can neither be seen nor felt. While some people are exposed to artificial UVR sources , everyone is exposed to solar UVR. Solar UVR levels are influenced by several factors:
Small amounts of UVR are beneficial to health and play an essential role in the production of vitamin D. However, excessive exposure to UVR is associated with negative health consequences as UVR is carcinogenic to humans.
Acute effects of UVR include DNA damage, sunburn, phototoxic and photoallergic reactions, and suppression of the immune system. Immunosuppression can be considered as a risk factor for cancer and can cause reactivation of viruses .
Chronic effects on skin and lips from UVR exposure include:
Excessive exposure to UVR caused around 1.2 million new cases of non-melanoma skin cancers and 325 000 melanomas of the skin, and 64 000 premature deaths from non-melanoma and 57 000 melanomas of the skin in the year 2020.
Acute effects of UVR include photokeratitis and photoconjunctivitis . These effects are reversible, easily prevented by protective eyewear and are not usually associated with any long-term damage but are painful and might require therapeutic intervention.
Chronic effects of UVR include:
UV exposure may also be involved in the development of age-related macular degeneration .
Worldwide, it is estimated that 15 million people are blind due to cataracts; of these, some 10% may be due to exposure to UVR. UVR in small amounts is essential to good health as it leads to the production of vitamin D in the body. Vitamin D strengthens the bone and musculoskeletal system. People who have very low sun exposure – such as those in institutional care or housebound, people with deeply pigmented skin living in high latitudes or those who, for religious or cultural reasons cover their entire body surface when they are outdoors – should consider oral vitamin D supplementation. Children and adolescents are particularly vulnerable to the harmful effects of UVR due to their skin and eye structure. Sunburns in childhood lead to a higher risk of skin cancer in later life. Also, a larger amount of UVR can reach and damage their retina.
Fair-skinned people suffer more from sunburn and have a higher risk of skin cancer than dark-skinned people; however, darker-skinned people also develop skin cancers. Consideration of eye damage is important for everyone.
People at increased risk include those with a high number of naevi, those taking photosensitizing medication, and those with a family history of skin cancer. Outdoor workers exposed occupationally to solar UVR levels face an increased risk of developing non-melanoma skin cancers. Skin cancer is highly preventable. WHO recommends the following measures to protect against excessive exposure to UVR.
Encouraging children to take the simple precautions above will prevent both short-term and long-term damage while still allowing them to enjoy the time they spend outdoors. WHO aims to reduce the burden of disease resulting from exposure to UVR. It encourages research, develops guidance and disseminates information tools about effective UVR protection interventions related to the public, occupationally exposed workers and patients. The Global Solar UV index , an information tool that describes the level of solar UVR at the Earth’s surface, was developed by WHO, the United Nations Environment Programme , the World Meteorological Organization and the International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection . The UVI is an indicator of the potential for skin damage. It alerts people about the need to adopt protective measures when exposed to UVR. The higher the UVI value, the greater the potential for damage to the skin and eye, and the less time it takes for harm to occur. Sun protection measures should be used when the UVI reaches 3 or above. Related
Ultraviolet radiation
The Global UV Index Atlas of Health and Climate Inheriting a sustainable world: Atlas on children’s health and the environment Artificial tanning devices: public health interventions to manage sunbeds
IARC GLOBOCAN 2020
The effect of occupational exposure to solar ultraviolet radiation on malignant skin melanoma and non-melanoma skin cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis from the WHO/ILO joint estimates of the work-related burden of disease and injury News

========================================
universal-health-coverage-(uhc)
========================================
Universal health coverage means that all people have access to the full range of quality health services they need, when and where they need them, without financial hardship. It covers the full continuum of essential health services, from health promotion to prevention, treatment, rehabilitation and palliative care across the life course.
The delivery of these services requires health and care workers with an optimal skills mix at all levels of the health system, who are equitably distributed, adequately supported with access to quality assured products, and enjoying decent work.
Protecting people from the financial consequences of paying for health services out of their own pockets reduces the risk that people will be pushed into poverty because the cost of needed services and treatments requires them to use up their life savings, sell assets, or borrow – destroying their futures and often those of their children.
Achieving UHC is one of the targets the nations of the world set when they adopted the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals in 2015. At the United Nations General Assembly High Level Meeting on UHC in 2019, countries reaffirmed that health is a precondition for and an outcome and indicator of the social, economic and environmental dimensions of sustainable development. WHO’s Thirteenth General Programme of Work aims to have 1 billion more people benefit from UHC by 2025, while also contributing to the targets of 1 billion more people better protected from health emergencies and 1 billion more people enjoying better health and well-being. Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, progress towards UHC was already faltering. The impressive pace of progress in expanding service coverage prior to 2015 did not continue as the UHC service coverage index increased only 3 points to 68 by 2019 and stagnated at this level through 2021. This indicates that in 2021, about 4.5 billion people were not fully covered by essential health services. The portion of the population incurring catastrophic out-of-pocket health spending increased continuously from 9.6% in 2000 to 13.5% in 2019 when it surpassed 1 billion people. Moreover, in 2019, out-of-pocket health spending dragged 344 million people further into extreme poverty and 1.3 billion into relative poverty. In total, in 2019, 2 billion people faced any form of financial hardship .
The global pattern of the recent stagnating progress in service coverage while catastrophic health spending increases continuously is consistent across all regions, country income groups and most countries at all income levels.
Inequalities continue to be a fundamental challenge for UHC. Even where there is national progress on health service coverage, the aggregate data mask inequalities within-countries. For example, coverage of reproductive, maternal, child and adolescent health services tends to be higher among those who are richer, more educated, and living in urban areas, especially in low-income countries. On financial hardship, catastrophic out-of-pocket health spending is more prevalent among people living in households with older members . People living in poorer households, rural areas and in households with older family members are more likely to be further dragged into poverty by out-of-pocket health spending. Monitoring health inequalities is essential to identify and track disadvantaged populations to provide decision-makers with an evidence base to formulate more equity-oriented policies, programmes and practices towards the progressive realization of UHC. Better data are also needed on gender inequalities, socioeconomic disadvantages, and specific issues faced by indigenous peoples and refugee and migrant populations displaced by conflict and economic and environmental crises.
At the height of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2021, essential services were disrupted in 92% of countries. In 2022, 84% of countries still reported disruptions. In 2021, some 25 million children under 5 years missed out on routine immunization. There were glaring disparities in access to COVID-19 vaccines, with an average of 34% of the population vaccinated in low-income countries compared to almost 73% in high-income countries as of June 2023. Potentially life-saving emergency, critical and operative care interventions also showed increased service disruptions, likely resulting in significant near-term impact on health outcomes. As a foundation for and way to move towards UHC, WHO recommends reorienting health systems using a primary health care approach. PHC is the most inclusive, equitable, cost-effective and efficient approach to enhance people’s physical and mental health, as well as social well-being. It enables universal, integrated access to health services as close as possible to people’s everyday environments. It also helps deliver the full range of quality services and products that people need for health and well-being, thereby improving coverage and financial protection. Significant cost efficiencies can be achieved and most essential UHC interventions can be delivered through a PHC approach. Some 75% of the projected health gains from the SDGs could also be realized through PHC, including saving over 60 million lives and increasing average global life expectancy by 3.7 years by 2030.
Strengthening health systems based on PHC should result in measurable health impact in countries. Yes. The UHC target of the SDGs measures the ability of countries to ensure that everyone receives the health care they need, when and where they need it, without facing financial hardship. It covers the full continuum of key services from health promotion to prevention, protection, treatment, rehabilitation and palliative care. Progress on UHC is tracked using two indicators:
More information can be found in this questions and answers page.
Detailed data is provided in the WHO Global Health Observatory Data Repository for UHC. Country profiles can be downloaded from https://data.who.int/.
Based on this data, WHO publishes global reports on UHC every two years. See the reports here.
UHC is firmly based on the 1948 WHO Constitution, which declares health a fundamental human right and commits to ensuring the highest attainable level of health for all.
As a foundation for UHC, WHO recommends reorienting health systems towards primary health care . In countries with fragile health systems, WHO focuses on technical assistance to build national institutions and service delivery to fill critical gaps in emergencies. In more robust health system settings, WHO drives public health impact towards health coverage for all through policy dialogue for the systems of the future and strategic support to improve performance.
But WHO is not alone: WHO works with many different partners in different situations and for different purposes to advance UHC around the world.
Some of WHO’s partnerships include:
Related
News
Events
More
PublicationsGlobal spending on health: rising to the pandemic's challengesUHC Service Package Delivery & Implementation ToolInvesting in sexual and reproductive health and rights: essential elements of universal health coverageVideoUniversal Health Coverage - What does it mean? Publications
Video

========================================
urban-health
========================================
The rising noncommunicable disease burden, the persistent threat of infectious disease outbreaks and an increased risk of violence and injuries are key public health concerns in urban areas. This triple threat includes:
Injuries and interpersonal violence particularly affect children, young adults, older people and the most marginalized groups as a result of poor working and living conditions and a lack of safe transport and infrastructure. Infectious diseases like COVID-19, tuberculosis, dengue and diarrhoea thrive in poor and overcrowded environments and are closely related to unhealthy housing and poor sanitation and waste management. Poor urban waste management fuels transmission of diseases such as the Zika and Ebola viruses. While urbanization can bring health and economic benefits, rapid and unplanned urbanization can have many negative social and environmental health impacts, which hit the poorest and most vulnerable the hardest. Health inequities are perhaps most stark in urban areas, sometimes varying from street to street. Migrants and other disadvantaged groups tend to be clustered in the most deprived and environmentally degraded neighbourhoods with the fewest mobility, work and educational opportunities, the poorest access to health services and below average health outcomes.
Cities consume over two-thirds of the world’s energy and are responsible for over 60% of greenhouse gas emissions. Urban populations are among the most vulnerable to climate change: inland cities may experience temperatures 3–5ºC higher than surrounding rural areas due to the so-called heat island effect of large concrete expanses and lack of green cover. The COVID-19 pandemic showed that cities often bear the brunt of emergencies. Citizens frequently have high exposure to the virus and have no space or the means to protect themselves. Overcrowding and lack of clean sanitation services increase the risk of contagion, limit residents’ ability to adhere to public health measures and increase the likelihood of interpersonal violence. Around the globe, COVID-19 spread quickly in areas with other existing health inequities, such as the unfair and preventable differences in people’s health, well-being and access to quality health services. COVID-19 cases and deaths in deprived areas were double those of more advantaged areas.
Urban health is a growing priority for WHO and the scale of the challenges to urban health means that approaches to deal with them must be strategic, multisectoral and coordinated. WHO addresses urban health in multiple cross-cutting ways, focusing on better air quality, water and sanitation and other environmental determinants; healthy urban planning; healthier and smoke-free environments; safe and healthy mobility; prevention of violence and injuries; healthy food systems and diets; environmental management of vector-borne diseases; emergency preparedness and responses in urban settings. Addressing risks and needs of specific population groups, such as children and older people and migrants, is also a priority. The interlinked nature of urban health challenges means that action in one sector can have benefits for many other sectors.
To help Member States address the above priorities, WHO supports the strengthening of the evidence base to allow policy-makers to make informed decisions when addressing health risks. It provides tools and guidance on what works and supports monitoring of key health-related indicators. WHO leads and engages in partnership activities fostering city-to-city exchanges and helps develop institutional and policy frameworks for good urban governance for health and well-being in cities. Related
More on Urban health
Publications
Partnerships and network:
News
Fact sheets

========================================
vector-borne-diseases
========================================
Vectors are living organisms that can transmit infectious pathogens between humans, or from animals to humans. Many of these vectors are bloodsucking insects which ingest disease-producing microorganisms during a blood meal from an infected host and later transmit it into a new host, after the pathogen has replicated. Often, once a vector becomes infectious, they are capable of transmitting the pathogen for the rest of their life during each subsequent bite/blood meal.
Vector-borne diseases are human illnesses caused by parasites, viruses and bacteria that are transmitted by vectors. Every year there are more than 700 000 deaths from diseases such as malaria, dengue, schistosomiasis, human African trypanosomiasis, leishmaniasis, Chagas disease, yellow fever, Japanese encephalitis and onchocerciasis.
The burden of these diseases is highest in tropical and subtropical areas, and they disproportionately affect the poorest populations. Since 2014, major outbreaks of dengue, malaria, chikungunya, yellow fever and Zika have afflicted populations, claimed lives, and overwhelmed health systems in many countries. Other diseases such as chikungunya, leishmaniasis and lymphatic filariasis cause chronic suffering, life-long morbidity, disability and occasional stigmatization.
Distribution of vector-borne diseases is determined by a complex set of demographic, environmental and social factors. Global travel and trade, unplanned urbanization, climate change and silent spread and adaptation of the vectors have all contributed to the spread of vector-borne diseases. Climate change substantially affects pathogens , vectors, and reservoir hosts, with implications for the transmission of many vector-borne diseases. Several vectors have expanded their latitude and altitude ranges, and the length of the season during which they are active is increasing. These trends are expected to continue as the climate continues to get warmer.
Vector
Disease caused
Type of pathogen
Mosquito
Aedes
Chikungunya
Dengue
Lymphatic filariasis
Rift Valley fever
Yellow Fever
Zika
Virus
Virus
Parasite
Virus
Virus
Virus
Anopheles
Lymphatic filariasis
Malaria
O'nyong'nyong virus Parasite
Parasite
Virus
Culex
Japanese encephalitis
Lymphatic filariasis
West Nile fever
Virus
Parasite
Virus
Aquatic snails
Schistosomiasis Parasite
Culicoides flies
Oropouche fever Virus
Blackflies
Onchocerciasis Parasite
Fleas
Plague Tungiasis
Bacteria
Ectoparasite Lice
Typhus
Louse-borne relapsing fever
Bacteria
Bacteria
Sandflies
Leishmaniasis
Sandfly fever Parasite
Virus
Ticks
Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever Lyme disease
Relapsing fever Rickettsial diseases Tick-borne encephalitis
Tularaemia
Virus
Bacteria
Bacteria
Bacteria
Virus
Bacteria
Triatome bugs
Chagas disease Parasite
Tsetse flies
Sleeping sickness Parasite
WHO response
The Global Vector Control Response 2017–2030 was approved by the World Health Assembly in 2017. It provides strategic guidance to countries and development partners for urgently strengthening vector control as a fundamental approach to preventing disease and responding to outbreaks. To achieve this, a re-alignment of vector control programmes is required, supported by increased technical capacity, improved infrastructure, strengthened monitoring and surveillance systems, and greater community mobilization. Ultimately, this will support the implementation of a comprehensive approach to vector control that will enable the achievement of disease-specific national and global goals and contribute to the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals and universal health coverage.
WHO Secretariat provides strategic, normative, and technical guidance to countries and development partners to strengthen vector control as a fundamental approach based on GVCR to prevent disease and respond to outbreaks. Specifically, WHO responds to vector-borne diseases by:
A crucial element in reducing the burden of vector-borne diseases is behavioural change. WHO works with partners to provide education and improve public awareness, so that people know how to protect themselves and their communities from mosquitoes, ticks, bugs, flies and other vectors.
Access to water and sanitation is a very important factor in disease control and elimination. WHO works together with many different government sectors to improve water storage, sanitation, thereby helping to control these diseases at the community level.
Related
WHO's work on vector control
Global vector control response 2017–2030
News
Fact sheets
Feature stories

========================================
violence-against-children
========================================
Most violence against children involves at least one of six main types of interpersonal violence that tend to occur at different stages in a child’s development.
When directed against girls or boys because of their biological sex or gender identity, any of these types of violence can also constitute gender-based violence.
Violence against children has lifelong impacts on health and well-being of children, families, communities, and nations. Violence against children can:
Violence against children is a multifaceted problem with causes at the individual, close relationship, community and societal levels. Important risk factors are:
Violence against children can be prevented. Preventing and responding to violence against children requires that efforts systematically address risk and protective factors at all four interrelated levels of risk .
Under the leadership of WHO, a group of 10 international agencies have developed and endorsed an evidence-based technical package called INSPIRE: Seven strategies for ending violence against children. The package aims to help countries and communities achieve SDG Target 16.2 on ending violence against children. Each letter of the word INSPIRE stands for one of the strategies, and most have been shown to have preventive effects across several different types of violence, as well as benefits in areas such as mental health, education and crime reduction.
The seven strategies are:
A May 2016 World Health Assembly resolution endorsed the first ever WHO Global plan of action on strengthening the role of the health system within a national multisectoral response to address interpersonal violence, in particular against women and girls, and against children.
According to this plan, WHO in collaboration with Member States and other partners, is committed to:
(1) Global prevalence of past-year violence against children: a systematic review and minimum estimates. Hillis S, Mercy J, Amobi A, Kress H. Pediatrics 2016; 137(3): e20154079.
Related
Fact sheets

========================================
violence-against-women
========================================
OverviewThe United Nations defines violence against women as "any act of gender-based violence that results in, or is likely to result in, physical, sexual, or mental harm or suffering to women, including threats of such acts, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or in private life" (1).Intimate partner violence refers to behaviour by an intimate partner or ex-partner that causes physical, sexual or psychological harm, including physical aggression, sexual coercion, psychological abuse and controlling behaviours.Sexual violence is "any sexual act, attempt to obtain a sexual act, or other act directed against a person’s sexuality using coercion, by any person regardless of their relationship to the victim, in any setting. It includes rape, defined as the physically forced or otherwise coerced penetration of the vulva or anus with a penis, other body part or object, attempted rape, unwanted sexual touching and other non-contact forms."World report on violence and healthScope of the problemPopulation-level surveys based on reports from survivors provide the most accurate estimates of the prevalence of intimate partner violence and sexual violence. A 2018 analysis of prevalence data from 2000–2018 across 161 countries and areas, conducted by WHO on behalf of the UN Interagency working group on violence against women, found that worldwide, nearly 1 in 3, or 30%, of women have been subjected to physical and/or sexual violence by an intimate partner or non-partner sexual violence or both (2).Global and regional estimates of violence against womenOver a quarter of women aged 15–49 years who have been in a relationship have been subjected to physical and/or sexual violence by their intimate partner at least once in their lifetime . The prevalence estimates of lifetime intimate partner violence range from 20% in the Western Pacific, 22% in high-income countries and Europe and 25% in the WHO Regions of the Americas to 33% in the WHO African region, 31% in the WHO Eastern Mediterranean Region, and 33% in the WHO South-East Asia region. Globally as many as 38% of all murders of women are committed by intimate partners. In addition to intimate partner violence, globally 6% of women report having been sexually assaulted by someone other than a partner, although data for non-partner sexual violence are more limited. Intimate partner and sexual violence are mostly perpetrated by men against women.Lockdowns during the COVID-19 pandemic and its social and economic impacts have increased the exposure of women to abusive partners and known risk factors, while limiting their access to services. Situations of humanitarian crises and displacement may exacerbate existing violence, such as by intimate partners, as well as non-partner sexual violence, and may also lead to new forms of violence against women.COVID-19 and violence against womenFactors associated with intimate partner violence and sexual violence against womenIntimate partner and sexual violence is the result of factors occurring at individual, family, community and wider society levels that interact with each other to increase or reduce risk . Some are associated with being a perpetrator of violence, some are associated with experiencing violence and some are associated with both.Risk factors for both intimate partner and sexual violence include:lower levels of education ;a history of exposure to child maltreatment ;witnessing family violence ;antisocial personality disorder ;harmful use of alcohol ; harmful masculine behaviours, including having multiple partners or attitudes that condone violence ;community norms that privilege or ascribe higher status to men and lower status to women; low levels of women’s access to paid employment; andlow level of gender equality .Factors specifically associated with intimate partner violence include:past history of exposure to violence;marital discord and dissatisfaction;difficulties in communicating between partners; andmale controlling behaviours towards their partners.Factors specifically associated with sexual violence perpetration include:beliefs in family honour and sexual purity;ideologies of male sexual entitlement; andweak legal sanctions for sexual violence.Gender inequality and norms on the acceptability of violence against women are a root cause of violence against women.Health consequencesIntimate partner and sexual violence cause serious short- and long-term physical, mental, sexual and reproductive health problems for women. They also affect their children’s health and well-being. This violence leads to high social and economic costs for women, their families and societies. Such violence can:Have fatal outcomes like homicide or suicide.Lead to injuries, with 42% of women who experience intimate partner violence reporting an injury as a consequence of this violence (3).Lead to unintended pregnancies, induced abortions, gynaecological problems, and sexually transmitted infections, including HIV. WHO's 2013 study on the health burden associated with violence against women found that women who had been physically or sexually abused were 1.5 times more likely to have a sexually transmitted infection and, in some regions, HIV, compared to women who had not experienced partner violence. They are also twice as likely to have an abortion (3).Intimate partner violence in pregnancy also increases the likelihood of miscarriage, stillbirth, pre-term delivery and low birth weight babies. The same 2013 study showed that women who experienced intimate partner violence were 16% more likely to suffer a miscarriage and 41% more likely to have a pre-term birth (3).These forms of violence can lead to depression, post-traumatic stress and other anxiety disorders, sleep difficulties, eating disorders, and suicide attempts. The 2013 analysis found that women who have experienced intimate partner violence were almost twice as likely to experience depression and problem drinking.Health effects can also include headaches, pain syndromes gastrointestinal disorders, limited mobility and poor overall health.Sexual violence, particularly during childhood, can lead to increased smoking, substance use, and risky sexual behaviours. It is also associated with perpetration of violence and being a victim of violence .Impact on childrenChildren who grow up in families where there is violence may suffer a range of behavioural and emotional disturbances. These can also be associated with perpetrating or experiencing violence later in life.Intimate partner violence has also been associated with higher rates of infant and child mortality and morbidity .Social and economic costsThe social and economic costs of intimate partner and sexual violence are enormous and have ripple effects throughout society. Women may suffer isolation, inability to work, loss of wages, lack of participation in regular activities and limited ability to care for themselves and their children.Prevention and responseThere is growing evidence on what works to prevent violence against women, based on well-designed evaluations. In 2019, WHO and UN Women with endorsement from 12 other UN and bilateral agencies published RESPECT women – a framework for preventing violence against women aimed at policy makers. Each letter of RESPECT stands for one of seven strategies: Relationship skills strengthening; Empowerment of women; Services ensured; Poverty reduced; Enabling environments created; Child and adolescent abuse prevented; and Transformed attitudes, beliefs and norms. For each of these seven strategies there are a range of interventions in low and high resource settings with varying degree of evidence of effectiveness. Examples of promising interventions include psychosocial support and psychological interventions for survivors of intimate partner violence; combined economic and social empowerment programmes; cash transfers; working with couples to improve communication and relationship skills; community mobilization interventions to change unequal gender norms; school programmes that enhance safety in schools and reduce/eliminate harsh punishment and include curricula that challenges gender stereotypes and promotes relationships based on equality and consent; and group-based participatory education with women and men to generate critical reflections about unequal gender power relationships.RESPECT also highlights that successful interventions are those that prioritize safety of women; whose core elements involve challenging unequal gender power relationships; that are participatory; address multiple risk factors through combined programming and that start early in the life course. To achieve lasting change, it is important to enact and enforce legislation and develop and implement policies that promote gender equality; allocate resources to prevention and response; and invest in women’s rights organizations.RESPECT women: Preventing violence against womenRole of the health sectorWhile preventing and responding to violence against women requires a multi-sectoral approach, the health sector has an important role to play. The health sector can:advocate to make violence against women unacceptable and for such violence to be addressed as a public health problem;provide comprehensive services, sensitize and train health care providers in responding to the needs of survivors holistically and empathetically;prevent recurrence of violence through early identification of women and children who are experiencing violence and providing appropriate referral and support;promote egalitarian gender norms as part of life skills and comprehensive sexuality education curricula taught to young people; andgenerate evidence on what works and on the magnitude of the problem by carrying out population-based surveys, or including violence against women in population-based demographic and health surveys, as well as in surveillance and health information systems. WHO responseAt the World Health Assembly in May 2016, Member States endorsed a global plan of action on strengthening the role of the health systems in addressing interpersonal violence, in particular against women and girls and against children.Global plan of action to strengthen the role of the health system within a national multisectoral response to address interpersonal violence, in particular against women and girls, and against childrenWHO, in collaboration with partners, is:building the evidence base on the size and nature of violence against women in different settings and supporting countries' efforts to document and measure this violence and its consequences, including improving the methods for measuring violence against women in the context of monitoring for the Sustainable Development Goals. This is central to understanding the magnitude and nature of the problem and to initiating action in countries and globally;strengthening research and capacity to assess interventions to prevent and respond to violence against women;undertaking interventions research to test and identify effective health sector interventions to address violence against women;developing guidelines and implementation tools for strengthening the health sector response to intimate partner and sexual violence and synthesizing evidence on what works to prevent such violence;supporting countries and partners to implement the global plan of action on violence and monitoring progress including through documentation of lessons learned; andcollaborating with international agencies and organizations to reduce and eliminate violence globally through initiatives such as the Sexual Violence Research Initiative, Together for Girls, the UN Women-WHO Joint Programme on Strengthening Violence against Women measurement and data Collection and use, the UN Joint Programme on Essential Services Package for Women Subject to Violence, and the Secretary General’s political strategy to address violence against women and COVID-19. WHO and UN Women, along with other partners, co-lead the Action Coalition on Gender-based Violence, an innovative partnership of governments, civil society, youth leaders, private sector and philanthropies to develop a bold agenda of catalytic actions and leverage funding to eradicate violence against women. (1) United Nations. Declaration on the elimination of violence against women. New York : UN, 1993.(2) Violence against women Prevalence Estimates, 2018. Global, regional and national prevalence estimates for intimate partner violence against women and global and regional prevalence estimates for non-partner sexual violence against women. WHO: Geneva, 2021 (3) WHO, LSHTM, SAMRC. Global and regional estimates of violence against women: prevalence and health impacts of intimate partner violence and non-partner sexual violence. WHO: Geneva, 2013.
The United Nations defines violence against women as "any act of gender-based violence that results in, or is likely to result in, physical, sexual, or mental harm or suffering to women, including threats of such acts, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or in private life" (1).
Intimate partner violence refers to behaviour by an intimate partner or ex-partner that causes physical, sexual or psychological harm, including physical aggression, sexual coercion, psychological abuse and controlling behaviours.
Sexual violence is "any sexual act, attempt to obtain a sexual act, or other act directed against a person’s sexuality using coercion, by any person regardless of their relationship to the victim, in any setting. It includes rape, defined as the physically forced or otherwise coerced penetration of the vulva or anus with a penis, other body part or object, attempted rape, unwanted sexual touching and other non-contact forms."
Population-level surveys based on reports from survivors provide the most accurate estimates of the prevalence of intimate partner violence and sexual violence. A 2018 analysis of prevalence data from 2000–2018 across 161 countries and areas, conducted by WHO on behalf of the UN Interagency working group on violence against women, found that worldwide, nearly 1 in 3, or 30%, of women have been subjected to physical and/or sexual violence by an intimate partner or non-partner sexual violence or both (2).
Over a quarter of women aged 15–49 years who have been in a relationship have been subjected to physical and/or sexual violence by their intimate partner at least once in their lifetime . The prevalence estimates of lifetime intimate partner violence range from 20% in the Western Pacific, 22% in high-income countries and Europe and 25% in the WHO Regions of the Americas to 33% in the WHO African region, 31% in the WHO Eastern Mediterranean Region, and 33% in the WHO South-East Asia region. Globally as many as 38% of all murders of women are committed by intimate partners. In addition to intimate partner violence, globally 6% of women report having been sexually assaulted by someone other than a partner, although data for non-partner sexual violence are more limited. Intimate partner and sexual violence are mostly perpetrated by men against women.
Lockdowns during the COVID-19 pandemic and its social and economic impacts have increased the exposure of women to abusive partners and known risk factors, while limiting their access to services. Situations of humanitarian crises and displacement may exacerbate existing violence, such as by intimate partners, as well as non-partner sexual violence, and may also lead to new forms of violence against women.
Intimate partner and sexual violence is the result of factors occurring at individual, family, community and wider society levels that interact with each other to increase or reduce risk . Some are associated with being a perpetrator of violence, some are associated with experiencing violence and some are associated with both.
Risk factors for both intimate partner and sexual violence include:
Factors specifically associated with intimate partner violence include:
Factors specifically associated with sexual violence perpetration include:
Gender inequality and norms on the acceptability of violence against women are a root cause of violence against women.
Intimate partner and sexual violence cause serious short- and long-term physical, mental, sexual and reproductive health problems for women. They also affect their children’s health and well-being. This violence leads to high social and economic costs for women, their families and societies. Such violence can:
The social and economic costs of intimate partner and sexual violence are enormous and have ripple effects throughout society. Women may suffer isolation, inability to work, loss of wages, lack of participation in regular activities and limited ability to care for themselves and their children.
There is growing evidence on what works to prevent violence against women, based on well-designed evaluations. In 2019, WHO and UN Women with endorsement from 12 other UN and bilateral agencies published RESPECT women – a framework for preventing violence against women aimed at policy makers. Each letter of RESPECT stands for one of seven strategies: Relationship skills strengthening; Empowerment of women; Services ensured; Poverty reduced; Enabling environments created; Child and adolescent abuse prevented; and Transformed attitudes, beliefs and norms. For each of these seven strategies there are a range of interventions in low and high resource settings with varying degree of evidence of effectiveness. Examples of promising interventions include psychosocial support and psychological interventions for survivors of intimate partner violence; combined economic and social empowerment programmes; cash transfers; working with couples to improve communication and relationship skills; community mobilization interventions to change unequal gender norms; school programmes that enhance safety in schools and reduce/eliminate harsh punishment and include curricula that challenges gender stereotypes and promotes relationships based on equality and consent; and group-based participatory education with women and men to generate critical reflections about unequal gender power relationships.
RESPECT also highlights that successful interventions are those that prioritize safety of women; whose core elements involve challenging unequal gender power relationships; that are participatory; address multiple risk factors through combined programming and that start early in the life course. To achieve lasting change, it is important to enact and enforce legislation and develop and implement policies that promote gender equality; allocate resources to prevention and response; and invest in women’s rights organizations.
While preventing and responding to violence against women requires a multi-sectoral approach, the health sector has an important role to play. The health sector can:
At the World Health Assembly in May 2016, Member States endorsed a global plan of action on strengthening the role of the health systems in addressing interpersonal violence, in particular against women and girls and against children.
WHO, in collaboration with partners, is:
WHO and UN Women, along with other partners, co-lead the Action Coalition on Gender-based Violence, an innovative partnership of governments, civil society, youth leaders, private sector and philanthropies to develop a bold agenda of catalytic actions and leverage funding to eradicate violence against women. (1) United Nations. Declaration on the elimination of violence against women. New York : UN, 1993.
(2) Violence against women Prevalence Estimates, 2018. Global, regional and national prevalence estimates for intimate partner violence against women and global and regional prevalence estimates for non-partner sexual violence against women. WHO: Geneva, 2021 (3) WHO, LSHTM, SAMRC. Global and regional estimates of violence against women: prevalence and health impacts of intimate partner violence and non-partner sexual violence. WHO: Geneva, 2013.
Related
News
Feature stories

========================================
west-nile-virus
========================================
West Nile Virus is a member of the flavivirus genus and belongs to the Japanese encephalitis antigenic complex of the family Flaviviridae. West Nile Virus was first isolated in a woman in the West Nile district of Uganda in 1937. It was identified in birds in Nile delta region in 1953. Before 1997 WNV was not considered pathogenic for birds, but at that time in Israel a more virulent strain caused the death of different bird species presenting signs of encephalitis and paralysis. Human infections attributable to WNV have been reported in many countries in the World for over 50 years. In 1999 a WNV circulating in Israel and Tunisia was imported in New York producing a large and dramatic outbreak that spread throughout the continental United States of America in the following years. The WNV outbreak in USA highlighted that importation and establishment of vector-borne pathogens outside their current habitat represent a serious danger to the world. The largest outbreaks occurred in Greece, Israel, Romania, Russia and USA. Outbreak sites are on major birds migratory routes. In its original range, WNV was prevalent throughout Africa, parts of Europe, Middle East, West Asia, and Australia. Since its introduction in 1999 into USA, the virus has spread and is now widely established from Canada to Venezuela.
Human infection is most often the result of bites from infected mosquitoes. Mosquitoes become infected when they feed on infected birds, which circulate the virus in their blood for a few days. The virus eventually gets into the mosquito's salivary glands. During later blood meals , the virus may be injected into humans and animals, where it can multiply and possibly cause illness.
The virus may also be transmitted through contact with other infected animals, their blood, or other tissues.
A very small proportion of human infections have occurred through organ transplant, blood transfusions and breast milk. There is one reported case of transplacental WNV transmission.
To date, no human-to-human transmission of WNV through casual contact has been documented, and no transmission of WNV to health care workers has been reported when standard infection control precautions have been put in place.
Transmission of WNV to laboratory workers has been reported. Infection with WNV is either asymptomatic in around 80% of infected people, or can lead to West Nile fever or severe West Nile disease. About 20% of people who become infected with WNV will develop West Nile fever. Symptoms include fever, headache, tiredness, and body aches, nausea, vomiting, occasionally with a skin rash and swollen lymph glands. The symptoms of severe disease (also called neuroinvasive disease, such as West Nile encephalitis or meningitis or West Nile poliomyelitis) include headache, high fever, neck stiffness, stupor, disorientation, coma, tremors, convulsions, muscle weakness, and paralysis. It is estimated that approximately 1 in 150 persons infected with the West Nile virus will develop a more severe form of disease. Serious illness can occur in people of any age, however people over the age of 50 and some immunocompromised persons are at the highest risk for getting severely ill when infected with WNV.
The incubation period is usually 3 to 14 days.
West Nile virus can be diagnosed by a number of different tests:
IgM can be detected in nearly all cerebrospinal fluid and serum specimens received from WNV infected patients at the time of their clinical presentation. Serum IgM antibody may persist for more than a year. Treatment is supportive for patients with neuro-invasive West Nile virus, often involving hospitalization, intravenous fluids, respiratory support, and prevention of secondary infections. No vaccine is available for humans.
WN virus is maintained in nature in a mosquito-bird-mosquito transmission cycle. Mosquitoes of the genus Culex are generally considered the principal vectors of WNV, in particular Cx. Pipiens. WNV is maintained in mosquito populations through vertical transmission . Birds are the reservoir hosts of WNV. In Europe, Africa, Middle East and Asia, mortality in birds associated with WNV infection is rare. In striking contrast, the virus is highly pathogenic for birds in the Americas. Members of the crow family are particularly susceptible, but virus has been detected in dead and dying birds of more than 250 species. Birds can be infected by a variety of routes other than mosquito bites, and different species may have different potential for maintaining the transmission cycle.
Horses, just like humans, are “dead-end” hosts, meaning that while they become infected, they do not spread the infection. Symptomatic infections in horses are also rare and generally mild, but can cause neurologic disease, including fatal encephalomyelitis. Since WNV outbreaks in animals precede human cases, the establishment of an active animal health surveillance system to detect new cases in birds and horses is essential in providing early warning for veterinary and human public health authorities. In the Americas, it is important to help the community by reporting dead birds to local authorities. Vaccines have been developed for horses. Treatment is supportive and consistent with standard veterinary practices for animals infected with a viral agent.
In the absence of a vaccine, the only way to reduce infection in people is by raising awareness of the risk factors and educating people about the measures they can take to reduce exposure to the virus.
Public health educational messages should focus on the following:
Effective prevention of human WNV infections depends on the development of comprehensive, integrated mosquito surveillance and control programmes in areas where the virus occurs. Studies should identify local mosquito species that play a role in WNV transmission, including those that might serve as a “bridge” from birds to human beings. Emphasis should be on integrated control measures including source reduction , water management, chemicals, and biological control methods. Health-care workers caring for patients with suspected or confirmed WNV infection, or handling specimens from them, should implement standard infection control precautions. Samples taken from people and animals with suspected WNV infection should be handled by trained staff working in suitably equipped laboratories.
The WHO regional office for Europe and WHO region of the Americas are intensively supporting WNV surveillance and outbreak response activities respectively in Europe and in North America, Latin America and the Caribbean, together with country offices and international partners.
Related

========================================
white-phosphorus
========================================
Key facts
White phosphorus is a white to yellow waxy solid with a garlic like odour. It ignites spontaneously in air at temperatures above 30 °C and continues to burn until it is fully oxidized or until deprived of oxygen. Burning phosphorus produces dense, white, irritating smoke containing mixed phosphorus oxides. White phosphorus is used for military purposes in grenades and artillery shells to produce illumination, to generate a smokescreen and as an incendiary. Its major industrial uses are in the production of phosphoric acid, phosphates and other compounds. Phosphates are used to manufacture a range of products including fertilizers and detergents. Phosphorus has been used as a rodenticide and in fireworks. White phosphorus is harmful to humans by all routes of exposure. It can be absorbed in toxic amounts following ingestion or dermal/mucosal exposure. The smoke from burning phosphorus is harmful to the eyes and respiratory tract as phosphorus oxides dissolve in moisture to form phosphoric acids. Systemic effects may be delayed for up to 24 hours after exposure. In severe cases of exposure, delayed systemic effects can include cardiovascular effects and collapse, as well as renal and hepatic damage and depressed consciousness and coma. Death may occur from shock, hepatic or renal failure, central nervous system or myocardial damage.
Exposure to white phosphorus can cause severe deep burns. The burns are extremely painful and result from a combination of thermal and chemical injuries. The affected areas of exposed skin may appear yellowish and may show necrotic, full-thickness burns surrounded by sloughed tissue.
White phosphorus is highly soluble in lipids; therefore, it can penetrate underlying tissues resulting in deep burns that are slow to heal. Caution should be exercised for spontaneous reignition of white phosphorus particles remaining in the damaged tissue and smoke emanating from the wound.
White phosphorus particles that have penetrated the skin, for example on shrapnel, may start to burn when the wound is opened and exposed to air. Yellowish grey or white smoke from burning phosphorus may be seen emanating from wounds. Smokes are irritating and can have garlic smell.
White phosphorus may be absorbed from the burned surface and cause systemic toxicity, particularly ECG changes, as described above.
White phosphorus particles may cause corneal burns and perforation. Exposure to the smoke from burning phosphorus may cause ocular irritation, blepharospasm, photophobia, lacrimation and conjunctivitis.
The smoke from burning phosphorus may cause irritation of the upper respiratory tract, coughing, headache and delayed-onset lung oedema.
After exposure, the priority is to stop the burning process. The care providers should be aware of the risk and should have immediate access to clean water or medically prepared saline water prior to starting the treatment. Use the following guidance when providing care to a person who has been exposed to white phosphorous:
White phosphorus is not a chemical weapon under the Chemical Weapons Convention , as it acts as an incendiary agent and not through its “chemical action on life processes” . The use of white phosphorus may violate Protocol III of the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons in one specific instance: if it is used, on purpose, as an incendiary weapon directly against humans in a civilian setting. Other uses of white phosphorus, such as illuminating a battlefield, are not prohibited. To establish an illegal use under the CCCW, an investigation into the intent behind the use of white phosphorus would be needed, which exceeds the mandate of WHO. At the request of the affected Member State, WHO provides assistance including the mobilization of international teams for on-site assistance . WHO staff may be in a position to establish the fact that victims carry burn wounds, but never to identify or confirm the causative agent of these burns – i.e. white phosphorus or any other incendiary chemical. This will be possible only by the medical staff directly treating the victim or by a relevant local authority.
Investigation into a potential illegal use of white phosphorous is not part of the WHO mandate and requires involvement of appropriate national or international authorities.
Related
WHO's work on deliberate events
WHO's work on chemical incidents
More
White phosphorus - American Chemical Society White Phosphorus - Incident management. Chemical Hazards CompendiumPhosphorus International Chemical Safety Card No. 0628Chemical Weapons ConventionThe Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons

========================================
yaws
========================================
Yaws forms part of a group of chronic bacterial infections commonly known as the endemic treponematoses. These diseases are caused by spiral bacteria of the genus Treponema, which also includes endemic syphilis and pinta. Yaws is the most common of these 3 infections.
The organism that causes yaws, Treponema pallidum subspecies pertenue, is closely related genetically to T. pallidum subspecies pallidum, which causes syphilis, bejel and pinta.
The disease is found primarily in poor communities in warm, humid and tropical forest areas of Africa, Asia, Latin America and the Pacific. Most affected populations live in rural areas far from health services. Poverty, low socio-economic conditions and poor personal hygiene facilitate the spread of yaws.
About 75–80% of people affected by yaws are children under 15 years of age. Peak incidence occurs in children aged 6–10 years, and males and females are equally affected. Transmission is through person-to-person contact of minor injuries. The initial lesion of yaws is teemed with the bacteria. Most lesions occur on the limbs. The incubation period is 9–90 days, with an average of 21 days. Without treatment, infection can lead to chronic disfigurement and disability.
WHO classifies countries into three epidemiological groups.
Group A: countries with currently known endemic status
Group B: previously endemic countries, with unknown current status
Group C: are countries with no history of yaws. In 2013, 13 countries were known to be endemic with yaws. Since then, and through intense surveillance activities, 2 additional countries reported confirmed cases (1) and 3 countries reported suspected yaws cases . In 2021, a single case of yaws was reported in a 5-year-old child from Malaysia, one of the countries listed by WHO as previously endemic but current status unknown (2). Further investigations are warranted.
Out of the countries and territories known to have been endemic in the 1950s, at least 76 fall into group B and need to be assessed to determine if the disease is still present. This can be done through integrated surveillance with other diseases, especially skin-related neglected tropical diseases. In 2020, 87 877 suspected yaws cases were reported to WHO from 11 countries, but only 346 cases were confirmed in 7 countries, with the majority of cases coming from the Western Pacific Region . In 2021, 123 866 cases were reported from 13 countries and 1102 cases confirmed from 9 countries. Over 80% of the cases were reported from the West Pacific Region, particularly Papua New Guinea, but most of the cases from this region are not laboratory confirmed.
Yaws initially presents as a papilloma teemed with bacteria, which makes clinical diagnosis straightforward. Without treatment, the papilloma will ulcerate. The diagnosis of the ulcerative form is more challenging and requires serological confirmation. Papilloma and ulcers are very infectious and in the absence of treatment can quickly spread to others. Other clinical forms of yaws exist but they are not as infectious.
Secondary yaws occurs weeks to months after the primary infection and typically presents with multiple raised yellow lesions or pain and swelling of long bones and fingers .
Traditionally, laboratory-based serological tests such as Treponema pallidum particle agglutination and rapid plasma reagin are widely used to diagnose treponemal infections . These tests cannot distinguish yaws from syphilis, however, and the interpretation of results from these tests in adults who live in yaws endemic areas therefore needs careful clinical assessment. About 40% of ulcers clinically misidentified as yaws are caused by the unrelated H. ducreyi bacterium.
Treponemal rapid tests are widely available and cheap; however, they cannot distinguish between past and current infection and therefore have limited use in monitoring interruption of transmission. Dual Path Platform Syphilis Screen and Confirm assay can detect both past and present infection. Because of the high cost of the DPP test, initial screening of suspected yaws cases can be done by the treponemal tests and positives confirmed by the DPP. However, countries may choose to use only DPP if affordability is not a problem.
Polymerase chain reaction technology is used to definitively confirm yaws by detecting the DNA in the skin lesions. It can also be used to monitor azithromycin resistance. This will be useful after mass treatment and post-elimination surveillance. Either of 2 antibiotics – azithromycin or benzathine penicillin – may be used to treat yaws:
Patients should be reexamined 4 weeks after antibiotic treatment. Complete clinical healing will be observed in over 95% of cases. Any individual with presumed treatment failure requires macrolide resistance testing and treatment with benzathine penicillin.
There is no vaccine for yaws. Health education and improvement in personal hygiene are essential components to reduce transmission. Contacts of patients with yaws should receive empiric treatment.
The eradication approach consists of mass treatment in which oral azithromycin is administered to the entire population in areas known to harbour yaws.
Three criteria for eradication of yaws are:
In 2020, as part of the agreement between WHO and the pharmaceutical company EMS Group , 1.4 million tablets of azithromycin were sent to Cameroon for large-scale treatment . From 2021–2023, EMS will provide 9 million tablets to support MDA in several countries, including Cameroon, Central African Republic, Congo, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu. Other endemic countries will receive azithromycin for active surveillance.
A recent study from Papua New Guinea (3) has confirmed that administering 3 rounds of mass drug administration with azithromycin at 6-month intervals significantly reduces the prevalence of active and latent yaws compared with one round. These findings offer hope that combined with active surveillance to detect and treat cases in between rounds of mass treatment can lead to early interruption of transmission.
Emergence of azithromycin-resistant strains is very rare but represents a potential threat. Close clinical monitoring of cases and biological surveillance is needed. Linezolid, a low-cost oxazolidinone, has in vitro and in vivo activity against T. pallidum, clinical research to assess the efficacy of linezolid as an alternative to treat macrolide-resistant yaws is being conducted.
The European and Developing Countries Clinical Trials Partnership is supporting the evaluation of a new loop-mediated isothermal amplification in Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire and Ghana to detect treponema and azithromycin resistance. The outcome of this study will support the scaling up of the yaws eradication effort.
WHO's work on yaws eradication involves:
WHO recommends integrating yaws eradication activities with NTD programmes and Skin NTDs . In this regard, WHO published a framework on integrated control of skin NTDs in June 2022 to guide countries.
References:
1. Yaws in the Philippines: first reported cases since the 1970s. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6990502/
2. Yaws: The forgotten tropical skin disease. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8680937/
3. Trial of Three Rounds of Mass Azithromycin Administration for Yaws Eradication. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34986286/
Related
News
Fact sheets

========================================
yellow-fever
========================================
Yellow fever is an epidemic-prone mosquito-borne vaccine preventable disease that is transmitted to humans by the bites of infected mosquitoes. Yellow fever is caused by an arbovirus transmitted to humans by the bites of infected Aedes and Haemagogus mosquitoes. These day-biting mosquitoes breed around houses , in forests or jungles , or in both habitats . Yellow fever is a high-impact high-threat disease, with risk of international spread, which represents a potential threat to global health security.
The incubation period for yellow fever is 3 to 6 days. Many people do not experience symptoms. Common symptoms include fever, muscle pain, headache, loss of appetite, nausea or vomiting. In most cases, symptoms disappear after 3 to 4 days. A small percentage of patients enter a second, more toxic phase within 24 hours of recovering from initial symptoms. High fever returns and several body systems are affected, usually the liver and the kidneys. In this phase, people are likely to develop jaundice , dark urine, and abdominal pain with vomiting. Bleeding can occur from the mouth, nose, eyes, or stomach. Half of the patients who enter the toxic phase die within 7–10 days.
There is no specific anti-viral drug for yellow fever. Patients should rest, stay hydrated and seek medical advice. Depending on the clinical manifestations and other circumstances, patients may be sent home, be referred for in-hospital management, or require emergency treatment and urgent referral. Treatment for dehydration, liver and kidney failure, and fever improves outcomes. Associated bacterial infections can be treated with antibiotics.
Yellow fever is difficult to diagnose, especially during the early stages. A more severe case can be confused with malaria, leptospirosis, viral hepatitis, other haemorrhagic fevers, infection with other flaviviruses , and poisoning.
Polymerase chain reaction testing in blood can sometimes detect the virus in early stages of the disease. In later stages, testing to identify antibodies is needed .
1. Vaccination
Vaccination is the most important means of preventing yellow fever. The yellow fever vaccine is safe, affordable and a single dose provides life-long protection against yellow fever disease. A booster dose of yellow fever vaccine is not needed.
The vaccine provides effective immunity within 10 days for 80–100% of people vaccinated, and within 30 days for more than 99% of people vaccinated.
Side-effects from the yellow fever vaccine are rare. People who are usually excluded from vaccination include:
In accordance with the International Health Regulations , countries have the right to require travellers to provide a certificate of yellow fever vaccination. If there are medical grounds for not getting vaccinated, this must be certified by the appropriate authorities. 2. Vector control
The risk of yellow fever transmission in urban areas can be reduced by eliminating potential mosquito breeding sites, including by applying larvicides to water storage containers and other places where standing water collects.
Preventive measures, such as wearing clothing to minimize skin exposure and repellents are recommended to avoid mosquito bites. The use of insecticide-treated bed nets is limited by the fact that Aedes mosquitos bite during the daytime.
Both vector surveillance and control are components of the prevention and control of vector-borne diseases, especially for transmission control in epidemic situations. For yellow fever, vector surveillance targeting Aedes aegypti and other Aedes species will help inform where there is a risk of an urban outbreak. 3. Epidemic preparedness and response
Prompt detection of yellow fever and rapid response through emergency vaccination campaigns are essential for controlling outbreaks. However, underreporting is a concern; WHO estimates the true number of cases to be 10 to 250 times what is now being reported. WHO recommends that every at-risk country has at least one national laboratory where basic yellow fever blood tests can be performed. A confirmed case of yellow fever in an unvaccinated population is considered an outbreak. A confirmed case in any context must be fully investigated. Investigation teams must assess and respond to the outbreak with both emergency measures and longer-term immunization plans.
The Eliminate Yellow Fever Epidemics Strategy was developed in response to two urban yellow fever outbreaks – in Luanda and Kinshasa , with international exportation to other countries, including China, showing that yellow fever poses a serious global threat requiring new strategic thinking.
The EYE strategy is comprehensive, multi-component and multi-partner. In addition to recommending vaccination activities, it calls for building resilient urban centres, planning for urban readiness, and strengthening the application of the International Health Regulations .
To find out more about the EYE Strategy, click here: Eliminate yellow fever epidemics strategy 2017-2026 It is expected that by the end of 2026, almost 1 billion people will be protected against yellow fever through vaccination.
References
Related
News
Feature stories

========================================
youth-violence
========================================
Youth violence refers to violence that occurs among individuals aged 10–29 years who are unrelated and who may or may not know each other. It generally takes place outside of the home. It includes a range of acts from bullying, both offline and online, and physical fighting, to more severe sexual and physical assault, gang-related violence or homicide. Youth violence results in deaths, injuries, disability and long-term health consequences including mental health problems and increased health-risk behaviours, which can lead to chronic diseases. It is further associated with higher rates of school-dropouts, negative impacts on cognitive development and opportunities to contribute to their communities. Worldwide an estimated 193 000 homicides occur among young people between 15–29 years of age each year, making it one of the leading causes of death for people in this age group. Youth homicide rates vary dramatically between and within countries. Between 2000–2019, rates of youth homicide decreased in most countries, although the decrease has been greater in high-income countries than in low- and middle-income countries. The majority of youth homicide victims are males, and most perpetrators are males too.
For every young person killed by violence, more sustain injuries that require hospital treatment. Firearm attacks end more often in fatal injuries than assaults that involve fists, feet, knives and blunt objects.
Sexual violence also affects a significant proportion of youth. For example, 1 in 5 girls and 1 in 7 boys report sexual abuse (1).
Physical fighting and bullying are also common among young people. A study of 40 developing countries showed that an average of 42% of boys and 37% of girls were exposed to bullying. Youth homicide and non-fatal violence not only contribute greatly to the global burden of premature death, injury and disability, but also have a serious, often lifelong, impact on a person's psychological and social functioning. This can affect victims' families, friends and communities. Youth violence increases the costs of health, welfare and criminal justice services; reduces productivity; decreases the value of property.
Promising prevention programmes include: Preventing youth violence requires a comprehensive approach that recognizes the strong correlation between rates of youth violence and economic inequalities. The most impoverished sectors of societies, marked by significant wealth gaps between the rich and the poor, consistently exhibit the highest rates of youth violence. Economic disparities exacerbate frustration and despair among disadvantaged youth, leading to an environment where violence becomes a common outlet. To achieve sustainable prevention gains, it is important to address income inequality, increase economic mobility, and enhance access to education, social protection and employment opportunities.
Preventing youth violence requires a comprehensive approach that addresses the social determinants of violence, such as income inequality, rapid demographic and social change, and low levels of social protection. Critical to reducing the immediate consequences of youth violence are improvements in pre-hospital and emergency care, including access to care. WHO and partners decrease youth violence through initiatives that help to identify, quantify and respond to the problem, these include:
References
Related
Fact sheets

========================================
zika-virus
========================================
Zika virus is a mosquito-borne virus first identified in Uganda in 1947 in a Rhesus macaque monkey followed by evidence of infection and disease in humans in other African countries in the 1950s. From the 1960s to 1980s, sporadic human infections were detected across Africa and Asia. However, since 2007 outbreaks of Zika virus disease have been recorded in Africa, the Americas, Asia and the Pacific. In outbreaks over the last decade Zika virus infection was found to be associated with increased incidence of Guillain-Barré syndrome. When Zika virus emerged in the Americas, with a large epidemic in Brazil in 2015, an association between Zika virus infection and microcephaly was first described; there were similar findings in French Polynesia upon retrospective review. From February to November 2016, WHO declared a Public Health Emergency of International Concern regarding microcephaly, other neurological disorders and Zika virus, and the causal link between Zika virus and congenital malformations was soon confirmed . Outbreaks of Zika virus disease were identified throughout most of the Americas and in other regions with established Aedes aegypti mosquitos. Infections were detected in travellers from active transmission areas and sexual transmission was confirmed as an alternate route of Zika virus infection. Cases of Zika virus disease globally declined from 2017 onwards; however, Zika virus transmission persists at low levels in several countries in the Americas and in other endemic regions. In addition, the first local mosquito-transmitted Zika virus disease cases were reported in Europe in 2019 and Zika virus outbreak activity was detected in India in 2021. To date, a total of 89 countries and territories have reported evidence of mosquito transmitted Zika virus infection; however, surveillance remains limited globally. Most people infected with Zika virus do not develop symptoms. Among those who do, they typically start 3–14 days after infection, are generally mild including rash, fever, conjunctivitis, muscle and joint pain, malaise and headache, and usually last for 2–7 days. These symptoms are common to other arboviral and non-arboviral diseases; thus, the diagnosis of Zika virus infection requires laboratory confirmation.
Zika virus infection during pregnancy is a cause of microcephaly and other congenital malformations in the infant, including limb contractures, high muscle tone, eye abnormalities and hearing loss. These clinical features are collectively referred to as congenital Zika syndrome. The risk of congenital malformations following infection in pregnancy remains unknown; an estimated 5–15% of infants born to women infected with Zika virus during pregnancy have evidence of Zika-related complications (3). Congenital malformations occur following both symptomatic and asymptomatic infection. Zika infection in pregnancy can also cause complications such as fetal loss, stillbirth and preterm birth. Zika virus infection can also cause Guillain-Barré syndrome, neuropathy and myelitis, particularly in adults and older children.
Research is ongoing to investigate the risk and effects of Zika virus infection on pregnancy outcomes, strategies for prevention and control, and effects of infection on other neurological disorders in children and adults. Zika virus is primarily transmitted by infected mosquitoes of the Aedes genus, mainly Aedes aegypti, in tropical and subtropical regions. Aedes mosquitoes usually bite during the day. These mosquitoes also transmit dengue, chikungunya and urban yellow fever.
Zika virus is also transmitted from mother to fetus during pregnancy, as well as through sexual contact, transfusion of blood and blood products, and possibly through organ transplantation.
Infection with Zika virus may be suspected based on symptoms of persons living in or visiting areas with Zika virus transmission and/or Aedes mosquito vectors. A diagnosis of Zika virus infection can only be confirmed by laboratory tests of blood or other body fluids, and it must be differentiated from cross-reactive related flaviviruses such as dengue virus, to which the patient may have been exposed or previously vaccinated. There is no specific treatment available for Zika virus infection or disease.
People with symptoms such as rash, fever or joint pain should get plenty of rest, drink fluids, and treat symptoms with antipyretics and/or analgesics. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs should be avoided until dengue virus infections are ruled out because of bleeding risk. If symptoms worsen, patients should seek medical care and advice.
Pregnant women living in areas with Zika transmission or who develop symptoms of Zika virus infection should seek medical attention for laboratory testing, information, counselling and other clinical care. No vaccine is yet available for the prevention or treatment of Zika virus infection. Development of a Zika vaccine remains an active area of research. Protection against mosquito bites during the day and early evening is a key measure to prevent Zika virus infection, especially among pregnant women, women of reproductive age and young children.
Personal protection measures include wearing clothing that covers as much of the body as possible; using physical barriers such as window screens and closed doors and windows; and applying insect repellent to skin or clothing that contains DEET, IR3535 or icaridin according to the product label instructions.
Young children and pregnant women should sleep under mosquito nets if sleeping during the day or early evening. Travellers and those living in affected areas should take the same basic precautions described above to protect themselves from mosquito bites.
Aedes mosquitoes breed in small collections of water around homes, schools and work sites. It is important to eliminate these mosquito breeding sites, including covering water storage containers, removing standing water in flowerpots, and cleaning up trash and used tires. Community initiatives are essential to support local government and public health programs to reduce mosquito breeding sites. Health authorities may also advise use of larvicides and insecticides to reduce mosquito populations and disease spread.
For regions with active transmission of Zika virus, all people with Zika virus infection and their sexual partners should receive information about the risks of sexual transmission of Zika virus.
WHO recommends that sexually active men and women be counselled and offered a full range of contraceptive methods to be able to make an informed choice about whether and when to become pregnant in order to prevent possible adverse pregnancy and fetal outcomes.
Women who have had unprotected sex and do not wish to become pregnant due to concerns about Zika virus infection should have ready access to emergency contraceptive services and counselling. Pregnant women should practice safer sex or abstain from sexual activity for at least the entire duration of pregnancy.
For regions with no active transmission of Zika virus, WHO recommends practicing safer sex or abstinence for a period of three months for men and two months for women who are returning from areas of active Zika virus transmission to prevent infection of their sex partners. Sexual partners of pregnant women living in or returning from areas where local transmission of Zika virus occurs should practice safer sex or abstain from sexual activity throughout pregnancy.
WHO supports countries to conduct surveillance and control of arboviruses through the implementation of the Global Arbovirus Initiative, which is aligned with and expands upon recommendations laid out in the Zika Strategic Response Plan. WHO responds to Zika in the following ways:
References
Related
Fact sheets
More
Congenital disorders fact sheetZika included in the 2018 annual review of the Blueprint list of priority diseasesGlobal vector control response 2017-2030Progress toward discovery of Zika virus vaccines and therapeutics
Congenital disorders fact sheetZika included in the 2018 annual review of the Blueprint list of priority diseasesGlobal vector control response 2017-2030Progress toward discovery of Zika virus vaccines and therapeutics

========================================
zoonoses
========================================
A zoonosis is an infectious disease that has jumped from a non-human animal to humans. Zoonotic pathogens may be bacterial, viral or parasitic, or may involve unconventional agents and can spread to humans through direct contact or through food, water or the environment. They represent a major public health problem around the world due to our close relationship with animals in agriculture, as companions and in the natural environment. Zoonoses can also cause disruptions in the production and trade of animal products for food and other uses. Zoonoses comprise a large percentage of all newly identified infectious diseases as well as many existing ones. Some diseases, such as HIV, begin as a zoonosis but later mutate into human-only strains. Other zoonoses can cause recurring disease outbreaks, such as Ebola virus disease and salmonellosis. Still others, such as the novel coronavirus that causes COVID-19, have the potential to cause global pandemics. Prevention and controlPrevention methods for zoonotic diseases differ for each pathogen; however, several practices are recognized as effective in reducing risk at the community and personal levels. Safe and appropriate guidelines for animal care in the agricultural sector help to reduce the potential for foodborne zoonotic disease outbreaks through foods such as meat, eggs, dairy or even some vegetables. Standards for clean drinking water and waste removal, as well as protections for surface water in the natural environment, are also important and effective. Education campaigns to promote handwashing after contact with animals and other behavioural adjustments can reduce community spread of zoonotic diseases when they occur.Antimicrobial resistance is a complicating factor in the control and prevention of zoonoses. The use of antibiotics in animals raised for food is widespread and increases the potential for drug-resistant strains of zoonotic pathogens capable of spreading quickly in animal and human populations. Who is at risk?Zoonotic pathogens can spread to humans through any contact point with domestic, agricultural or wild animals. Markets selling the meat or by-products of wild animals are particularly high risk due to the large number of new or undocumented pathogens known to exist in some wild animal populations. Agricultural workers in areas with a high use of antibiotics for farm animals may be at increased risk of pathogens resistant to current antimicrobial drugs. People living adjacent to wilderness areas or in semi-urban areas with higher numbers of wild animals are at risk of disease from animals such as rats, foxes or raccoons. Urbanization and the destruction of natural habitats increase the risk of zoonotic diseases by increasing contact between humans and wild animals.WHO ResponseWHO works with national governments, academia, non-governmental and philanthropic organizations, and regional and international partners to prevent and manage zoonotic threats and their public health, social and economic impacts. These efforts include fostering cross-sectoral collaboration at the human-animal-environment interface among the different relevant sectors at regional, national and international levels. WHO also works to develop capacity and promote practical, evidence-based and cost-effective tools and mechanisms for zoonoses prevention, surveillance and detection through reporting, epidemiological and laboratory investigation, risk assessment and control, and assisting countries in their implementation.As part of the One Health approach, the World Health Organization collaborates with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the World Organisation for Animal Health on the Global Early Warning System for Major Animal Diseases . This joint system builds on the added value of combining and coordinating alert mechanisms of the three agencies to assist in early warning, prevention and control of animal disease threats, including zoonoses, through data sharing and risk assessment. A zoonosis is an infectious disease that has jumped from a non-human animal to humans. Zoonotic pathogens may be bacterial, viral or parasitic, or may involve unconventional agents and can spread to humans through direct contact or through food, water or the environment. They represent a major public health problem around the world due to our close relationship with animals in agriculture, as companions and in the natural environment. Zoonoses can also cause disruptions in the production and trade of animal products for food and other uses. Zoonoses comprise a large percentage of all newly identified infectious diseases as well as many existing ones. Some diseases, such as HIV, begin as a zoonosis but later mutate into human-only strains. Other zoonoses can cause recurring disease outbreaks, such as Ebola virus disease and salmonellosis. Still others, such as the novel coronavirus that causes COVID-19, have the potential to cause global pandemics. Prevention methods for zoonotic diseases differ for each pathogen; however, several practices are recognized as effective in reducing risk at the community and personal levels. Safe and appropriate guidelines for animal care in the agricultural sector help to reduce the potential for foodborne zoonotic disease outbreaks through foods such as meat, eggs, dairy or even some vegetables. Standards for clean drinking water and waste removal, as well as protections for surface water in the natural environment, are also important and effective. Education campaigns to promote handwashing after contact with animals and other behavioural adjustments can reduce community spread of zoonotic diseases when they occur.
Antimicrobial resistance is a complicating factor in the control and prevention of zoonoses. The use of antibiotics in animals raised for food is widespread and increases the potential for drug-resistant strains of zoonotic pathogens capable of spreading quickly in animal and human populations.
WHO works with national governments, academia, non-governmental and philanthropic organizations, and regional and international partners to prevent and manage zoonotic threats and their public health, social and economic impacts. These efforts include fostering cross-sectoral collaboration at the human-animal-environment interface among the different relevant sectors at regional, national and international levels. WHO also works to develop capacity and promote practical, evidence-based and cost-effective tools and mechanisms for zoonoses prevention, surveillance and detection through reporting, epidemiological and laboratory investigation, risk assessment and control, and assisting countries in their implementation.
Related
News
Fact sheets
More